             United Nations                                                                 A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3
             General Assembly                                                     Distr.: General
                                                                                  6 November 2024

                                                                                  Original: English




Human Rights Council
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
Forty-eighth session
Geneva, 20–31 January 2025


            Summary of stakeholders’ submissions on Slovenia*

            Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
            Human Rights

       I. Background
            1.      The present report was prepared pursuant to Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1
            and 16/21, taking into consideration the periodicity of the universal periodic review and the
            outcome of the previous review.1 It is a summary of 12 stakeholders’ submissions2 for the
            universal periodic review, presented in a summarized manner owing to word-limit
            constraints. A separate section is provided for the contribution by the national human rights
            institution that is accredited in full compliance with the Paris Principles.


      II. Information provided by the national human rights
          institution accredited in full compliance with the Paris
          Principles
            2.      The Human Rights Ombudsman of the Republic of Slovenia (the Ombudsman) noted
            that Slovenia had not yet adopted a comprehensive anti-discrimination strategy.3
            3.     The Ombudsman stated that an effective prosecution of cases of hate speech remained
            an issue in Slovenia.4
            4.     The Ombudsman noted an increase in the number of complaints received in 2023
            regarding various forms of violence against residents of care institutions and highlighted a
            need to invest in training and education of all professionals working with older persons.5
            5.     The Ombudsman reported on the overcrowding in prisons, and referred to the situation
            of Ljubljana prison, which reportedly had 209 percent of occupancy rate in January 2024.6
            The Ombudsman considered the situation in the prisons alarming and noted a lack of
            measures to increase the use of alternative measures to imprisonment.7
            6.    The Ombudsman recalled that a Juvenile Justice Act had not been adopted, even
            though its adoption was foreseen by the Criminal Code adopted in 2008. 8
            7.     The Ombudsman reported on a shortage of staff in health care, especially for nursing
            staff, medical technicians, and paramedics. In the past several years, the Ombudsman
            expressed concerns over the shortage of experts in clinical psychology of children and


         * The present document is being issued without formal editing.

GE.24-20424 (E)
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


           adolescents, psychiatry, and child psychiatry, causing long waiting time in psychological and
           psychiatric treatment of children.9
           8.      The Ombudsman highlighted the need of urgent systemic action in institutional care
           for children with severe mental health disorders. Children and adolescents should be placed
           only in secure units which were designed for children and adolescents in terms of staff, space,
           services, and programmes. The Ombudsman also called for deinstitutionalisation of children
           with mental health issues.10
           9.      In 2020, the Ombudsman had recommended the introduction of assistance to families
           with children with special needs under 18 years old, aiming at reducing the
           institutionalisation of children with special needs. Unfortunately, the recommendation was
           not implemented.11
           10.    The Ombudsman noted a lack of special crisis referral centres for victims of rape or
           sexual violence to conduct a medical and forensic investigation and provide trauma assistance
           and counselling to the victims.12
           11.    The Ombudsman recommended that the authorities provide training to professionals
           of social work centres, educational institutions, health care, justice, and the police to make
           sure that the victims of violence receive appropriate help.13
           12.    The Ombudsman recommended that the authorities unify and harmonise the definition
           of disability in domestic legislation with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
           Disabilities (CRPD), reform the disability assessment system, introduce a single disability
           assessment body and amend the provisions of public regulations that discriminate against
           people with mental health problems.14 The Ombudsman called for stepping up the
           development of community-based care for persons with disabilities.15
           13.    The year 2023 was marked by violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
           people, especially during the Pride parade in Ljubljana and in Maribor. Incidents were also
           reported in the media in 2024.16
           14.    Persons who wished to change the gender marker on their identity documents were
           required to obtain a medical certificate. This requirement effectively meant that people must
           be diagnosed with a mental disorder by a doctor if they wanted to change their legal gender.
           The Ombudsman recommended adopting legislation on legal recognition of gender
           markers.17
           15.     Social exclusion of Roma remained widespread, particularly in south-eastern
           Slovenia. Many Roma in the region lived in segregated settlements without security of tenure,
           some even without basic services such as adequate safe drinking water, sanitation, and
           electricity. The Ombudsman called for ensuring access to adequate housing for Roma.18
           16.     The Ombudsman referred to a study indicating that premature mortality rate among
           Roma was 69 percent, compared to the national average of 19 percent. The child mortality
           rate for Roma aged one to five was seven times higher than the national average. Roma also
           faced higher hospitalization rates for various diseases.19
           17.    The distinction between "autochthonous" and "non-autochthonous" Roma persisted
           despite recommendations to eliminate it. The Act on Local Self-Government mandated Roma
           representation in municipal councils only in areas with "autochthonous" Roma population,
           excluding urban areas like Ljubljana and Maribor, as well as other municipalities with Roma
           population.20
           18.    The Ombudsman noted that migrants apprehended at the border were returned to
           neighbouring countries by the authorities without a written decision, and thus, they could not
           have access to legal remedies to challenge their return or transfer.21
           19.    According to national legislation (Aliens Act), unaccompanied minors and families
           with children should primarily be accommodated in appropriate facilities for children.
           However, in practice, families with children and some unaccompanied minors were detained
           in the Postojna Centre for Foreigners, which was a closed facility. The Ombudsman's
           recommendation to provide adequate alternative accommodation for families with children
           and to use detention of minors only as a last resort, was not implemented. 22


2
                                                                                           A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


      20.    The Ombudsman observed, in 2022 and 2023, that Slovenia's main asylum reception
      centre was overcrowded and thus, did not meet the required minimum material reception
      standards.23


III. Information provided by other stakeholders

 A.   Scope of international obligations and cooperation with human rights
      mechanisms

      21.    JS2 recommended that Slovenia accede to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of
      Statelessness.24
      22.  ICAN urged Slovenia to sign and ratify the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
      Weapons.25


 B.   National human rights framework

      Institutional infrastructure and policy measures
      23.   It was recommended that Slovenia ensure full independence and autonomy to the
      Advocate of the Principle of Equality (APE) so that its funding and financial control over the
      budget is fully independent from the interferences by the Government.26


 C.   Promotion and protection of human rights

 1.   Implementation of international human rights obligations, taking into account
      applicable international humanitarian law

      Equality and non-discrimination
      24.    APE recommended that Slovenia adopt and implement a comprehensive national
      strategy to combat all forms of discrimination, including intersectional discrimination, on all
      grounds and in all areas of social life.27
      25.    LEGEBITRA recommended that Slovenia amend anti-discrimination legislation to
      include sex characteristics as a prohibited ground of discrimination.28
      26.     CoE-Commissioner noted with concern that hate speech had been on the rise against
      migrants, Muslims, Roma, Jews and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people,
      in particular on the internet.29 CoE-ACFC observed that the number of complaints about cases
      of hate speech and ethnic intolerance had increased.30 CoE-ECRI stated that in spite of a
      significant increase in the handling of hate speech cases by the police, the number of
      indictments issued by prosecutors remained comparatively low. CoE-ECRI noted that the
      impunity gap, referred to in its 2019 report, in the prosecution of hate speech remained an
      issue. 31
      27.    CoE-CM and CoE-ACFC urged Slovenia to combat stereotypes and prejudice against
      the minority communities exposed to hate speech and to publicly condemn anti-minority
      rhetoric, and to effectively prosecute and sanction all instances of hate speech, including in
      public and political discourse.32
      28.    OSCE/ODIHR recommended that the authorities, in collaboration with civil society,
      celebrate and harness the strength of diversity within the country, including through
      awareness-raising programmes.33
      29.     APE recommended ensuring comprehensive legislation prohibiting all forms of hate
      speech and hate crime.34 OSCE/ODIHR recommended that Slovenia enact policies to address
      hate crimes in a comprehensive manner.35
      30.    OSCE/ODIHR recommended that the authorities condemn any form of discrimination
      and hate crime, and respond swiftly to hate crimes, including those motivated by gender or


                                                                                                             3
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


           sex, and investigate them so that the perpetrators can be brought to justice and adequate
           penalties imposed. OSCE/ODIHR recommended that the authorities build law enforcement
           and justice sector capacities to recognize and effectively investigate hate crimes and ensure
           that specialized training, focused on hate crime victims and their needs, is provided for
           officials and civil society organizations within the victim support structures. 36
           31.     OSCE/ODIHR recommended ensuring the availability of all necessary
           psychological, social and legal support for the victims, including through close co-operation
           with civil society.37
           32.      AI reported that the government did not collect disaggregated data on any minorities
           in all areas of social life, and that a lack of reliable information limited their ability to develop
           and implement targeted policies.38 CoE-ECRI noted with regret strong hesitations from the
           authorities to collect disaggregated equality data. CoE-ECRI concluded that its
           recommendation of 2019 to gather disaggregated equality data for the purpose of combating
           racial discrimination and propose legislative clarification to ensure that data was collected in
           all cases with due respect for standards on data protection, was not implemented.39
           OSCE/ODIHR recommended that the authorities assess and improve relevant mechanisms
           for hate crime recording and data collection, including gender disaggregated data.40

           Administration of justice, including impunity, and the rule of law
           33.     PTPR/JS3 reported on the issue of concealed mass graves of civilian or military
           victims killed during and after World War II in the territory of the Socialist Republic of
           Slovenia and on the challenges in identifying and burial of victims from those mass graves
           in Slovenia.41 PTPR/J3 stated that the exploration of sites of those graves had begun in 1990,
           but it occurred in the absence of funding, adequate regulatory framework and political will
           to pursue systemic approach to the issue.42
           34.    PTPR/JS3 recommended ensuring that all exhumed victims from mass graves are
           given a dignified burial and adopting a legal framework for the identification of exhumed
           victims.43

           Fundamental freedoms and the right to participate in public and political life
           35.   CoE-Commissioner noted with concern that the Criminal Code contained several
           defamation-related offences punishable with imprisonment.44 Slovenia had not yet fully
           decriminalised defamation.45 OSCE/ODIHR recommended repealing criminal provisions for
           defamation, slander and insult in favour of proportional civil remedies. 46
           36.     In 2021, the CoE-Commissioner concluded that there had been a marked deterioration
           in freedom of expression and media freedom over the preceding several months. CoE-
           Commissioner noted that Slovenia had a history of being a beacon of media freedom and a
           safe haven for journalists in the region and beyond.47 However, she was concerned that
           certain developments and some steps taken by the authorities in 2021 risked undermining the
           ability of critical voices to speak freely.48
           37.     CoE-Commissioner stated that current challenges to media freedom in Slovenia
           included an increasingly hostile environment for journalists and actions by the authorities
           that risked undermining public service media, against a backdrop of long-standing systemic
           weaknesses relating to the independence and regulation of the media landscape.49
           38.    CoE-Commissioner also expressed concern about sexist harassment of female
           journalists.50 CoE-Commissioner observed that female journalists had been subjected to
           misogynistic abuse and had been the victims of sexually explicit insults or personal attacks
           suggesting subordination to their husbands and targeting members of their families.51
           39.     CoE-Commissioner was informed that journalists rarely turned to the police or the
           judicial system when threatened with violence.52 CoE-Commissioner invited the authorities
           to reflect on how the police and the justice system could deal more effectively with threats
           of violence against journalists, including in the case of sexist threats made online and offline
           against female journalists.53 OSCE/ODIHR recommended that the authorities investigate the
           threats against journalists, and refrain from the use of derogatory or inflammatory rhetoric
           against the media.54

4
                                                                                      A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


40.    CoE-Commissioner noted that journalists had been the target of abusive legal
proceedings aimed at inhibiting critical reporting. Another impediment faced by Slovenian
journalists over the years had been attempts to legally compel them to reveal their sources,
especially when publishing classified information.55 CoE-Commissioner recommended that
the authorities amend the legislative framework to prevent SLAPP suits (strategic lawsuits
against public participation). This could include provisions to allow the early dismissal of
patently spurious lawsuits or measures to punish abuse, for example by reversing the costs
of proceedings.56
41.     CoE-Commissioner stated that the media were not sufficiently protected against
interference, either direct or indirect, from owners, based on their political and commercial
interests. The legislative framework did not address conflicts of interests between owners of
media and political parties, including ruling parties. Concentration of ownership was also a
difficult issue given the size of the media market in Slovenia. 57
42.     CoE-Commissioner recommended that meaningful reforms be considered to address
systemic weaknesses in the regulation of the media market in Slovenia to promote
independent, high-quality, and diverse media. Increasing the transparency of media
ownership could help alert readers and regulatory authorities about editorial interference or
media concentration.58 OSCE/ODIHR recommended protecting the public media from
political pressure, introducing adequate safeguards in the legislation and practice to guarantee
editorial independence, and ensuring financial sustainability and appointment of a
professional, non-politicized management and oversight bodies of public broadcasters. 59
43.     In 2021, CoE-Commissioner was concerned that several measures taken by the
authorities in the past year might have constituted disproportionate restrictions on the right
of peaceful assembly. The imposition of blanket bans on public gatherings as decided at times
by the authorities appeared to be disproportionate. She noted with regret that the Government
seemed to have used the pandemic as a pretext to discourage the expression of dissent or
political opposition.60
44.   CoE-Commissioner called on the Government to refrain from making stigmatising,
derogatory or misleading comments about the work of human rights defenders, and to
condemn such discourse by others.61
45.    OSCE/ODIHR noted that its Election Assessment Mission concluded that 2022
parliamentary elections were competitive and pluralistic. Contestants campaigned freely, and
voters had a wide variety of choices across the political spectrum. During the election
campaign, the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association were respected. However, the
Election Assessment Mission reported on the interference in the work of public broadcasters
and continuous targeting of journalists by political actors during elections.62
46.    OSCE/ODIHR recommended enhancing transparency and integrity of campaign
finance.63

Prohibition of all forms of slavery, including trafficking in persons
47.     ECLJ stated that refugees and undocumented migrants were the most susceptible to
being exploited by human traffickers in Slovenia. Slovenia had difficulties combatting
trafficking in human beings partly because of insufficient resources allocated by the
Government to identify potential victims of trafficking given the massive influx of irregular
migrants.64 ECLJ referred to low rates of convictions and lengthy court cases and argued that
they were an indication of a lack of resources needed to effectively combat trafficking in
human beings and protect victims.65
48.     CoE-GRETA urged the authorities to step up their efforts to identify victims of
trafficking, paying increased attention to detecting victims of trafficking amongst migrants
and asylum seekers, as well as improve the identification of, and assistance to, child victims
of human trafficking.66
49.    CoE-GRETA urged Slovenia to systematically inform all asylum seekers, in a
language they can understand, about their rights in the framework of the asylum procedure,
and the legal rights and the services available to victims of trafficking and ensure that pre-
removal risk assessments prior to all forced removals from Slovenia fully assess risks of

                                                                                                        5
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


           trafficking in human beings or re-trafficking on return, in compliance with the obligation of
           non-refoulement.67
           50.     CoE-GRETA urged the authorities to take additional measures to ensure compliance
           with the principle of non-punishment of victims of human trafficking for their involvement
           in unlawful activities, to the extent that they were compelled to do so. 68 CoE-GRETA urged
           the authorities to make additional efforts to guarantee access to justice for victims of human
           trafficking, in particular by ensuring that legal assistance is provided as soon as there are
           reasonable grounds for believing that a person is a victim of human trafficking, before the
           person concerned has to decide whether or not he/she wants to co-operate with the authorities
           and/or make an official statement.69
           51.    CoE-GRETA urged the authorities to extend the application of the procedural
           protection measures currently reserved to children under the age of 15 years to cover all child
           victims and witnesses of human trafficking up to the age of 18. 70
           52.     CoE-GRETA urged the authorities to take additional measures to strengthen the
           criminal justice response to trafficking in human beings, including by ensuring that human
           trafficking offences are proactively and promptly investigated, regardless of whether a
           complaint about the reported crime has been submitted or not; and by sensitising
           investigators, prosecutors and judges on the rights of victims of trafficking and the
           importance of preventing secondary victimisation, and encouraging the development of
           specialisation amongst judges to deal with human trafficking cases. 71
           53.    CoE-GRETA urged the authorities to prevent and combat trafficking for the purpose
           of labour exploitation and to strengthen co-operation between labour inspectors, law
           enforcement officers, tax authorities, trade unions and other civil society actors, with a view
           to collecting evidence necessary for successfully investigating and prosecuting cases of
           human trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation.72

           Right to social security
           54.     AI stated that the National Assembly adopted, in July 2023, the Long-Term Care Act,
           which envisaged introducing a standardized means of assessing individual needs and
           eligibility for long-term care, both at home and in institutions and provided for long-term
           financing of the care system, which had been one of the key challenges in the past. The
           authorities needed to adopt the necessary by-laws to ensure that the people requiring long-
           term care could effectively access adequate services.73

           Right to health
           55.    AI noted a significant shortage of family doctors in Slovenia, which led to significant
           delays in people receiving their first examination, diagnosis and therapy and might have
           caused preventable deaths.74 AI recommended that Slovenia adopt efficient emergency
           measures to ensure adequate access to primary healthcare to everyone and to adopt other
           systemic changes needed to guarantee quality access to health. 75

           Right to education
           56.   Broken Chalk urged the Government to accelerate the planned curriculum changes,
           complemented by updating teaching methods to ensure students are acquiring relevant
           knowledge and skills that meet national and international educational standards. Broken
           Chalk also mentioned the need for equipping students with necessary technological skills,
           developing digital literacy initiatives, and prioritizing STEM (Science, Technology,
           Engineering, and Mathematics) education.76
           57.    Broken Chalk highlighted the need for enhancing the attractiveness of teaching
           professions through competitive salaries, clear career progression paths and professional
           development opportunities. 77
           58.    CoE-ACFC noted that the authorities had taken measures with a view to increasing
           the enrolment of Roma children in pre-school education. However, the inclusion of Roma in
           kindergarten was still lower than in the average population. 78 AI noted that Roma children



6
                                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


     were kept separate in some state-run kindergartens. A disproportionate number of Roma
     children continued to be assigned to classes of pupils with special needs.79
     59.    CoE-CoM and CoE-ACFC called on the authorities to intensify their efforts, in co-
     operation with representatives of the Roma national minority and the families concerned, to
     increase pre-school attendance by Roma children in mainstream education. 80
     60.    Broken Chalk urged the authorities to enhance efforts to integrate Roma children and
     other minorities into the mainstream education system through increased language support
     and education on cultural openness.81

     The environment, and business and human rights
     61.     AI stated that the Government updated, in 2023, its draft Integrated National Energy
     and Climate Plan, setting new targets that included generating 30-35 percent of energy from
     renewable sources and reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 37-40 percent by 2030. AI
     noted that those targets were reportedly criticised by civil society representatives, arguing
     that they fell short of the Paris Agreement goals and needed to be more ambitious.82
     62.    AI reported that in 2024 the National Assembly voted in favour of amendments to the
     Environmental Protection Act imposing stricter requirements on emissions from co-
     incineration plants that were harmful to the health and other rights of nearby communities
     and to the climate.83
     63.     CoE-GRETA considered that the authorities should adopt legislation promoting
     transparency in supply chains to enable scrutiny of companies’ performance to prevent
     trafficking in human beings and labour exploitation.84 CoE-GRETA stated that the authorities
     should further strengthen engagement with the private sector, in line inter alia with the UN
     Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights with a view to raising awareness of the
     important role and responsibility of businesses in supporting the rehabilitation and recovery
     of victims of trafficking in human beings and labour exploitation, and to provide access to
     effective remedies.85

2.   Rights of specific persons or groups

     Women
     64.    CoE-GREVIO noted that although some measures for preventing and combating
     violence against women had been taken, they did not cover all forms of violence. CoE-
     GREVIO highlighted a need to ensure that measures taken by the authorities address all forms
     of violence against women, in a holistic and comprehensive fashion.
     65.    CoE-GREVIO encouraged the authorities to pursue the adoption of a new
     comprehensive national strategy on all forms of violence against women, including domestic
     violence in order to develop a long-term co-ordinated approach giving due regard to all forms
     of violence covered by the scope of the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and
     combating violence against women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention), and
     encompassing the prevention of such violence, protection of victims and the prosecution of
     perpetrators.86
     66.     CoE-GREVIO noted that the definitions of rape and sexual violence was amended by
     moving away from a force-based definition.87 AI conducted a survey in 2023 that revealed a
     relatively high level of awareness about the concept of sexual consent but significant
     misconceptions among young people regarding behaviours that required consent and the
     nature of consent itself.88 AI highlighted the need for continued education and dialogue to
     address misconceptions and improve understanding of sexual consent. AI recommended
     incorporating education on sexual consent in the formal school curriculum, adapted to the
     evolving capacity of learners.89
     67.    CoE-GREVIO encouraged the authorities to fully implement the newly adopted
     provisions of the Criminal Code covering the offences of rape and sexual violence and to
     ensure their effective application in practice by law-enforcement authorities, prosecutors and
     the judiciary, including in the absence of resistance by the victim and where the



                                                                                                           7
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


           circumstances of the case precluded valid consent. To this end, training for all relevant
           professionals should be conducted, and appropriate guidelines developed and implemented. 90
           68.    CoE-GREVIO and CoE-CoP recommended that Slovenia step up efforts to ensure
           prompt and appropriate responses from law-enforcement agencies in relation to all forms of
           violence against women covered by the Istanbul Convention.91
           69.     CoE-GREVIO and CoE-CoP recommended that Slovenia ensure systematic and
           mandatory initial and in-service training on the prevention and detection of all forms of
           violence against women covered by the Istanbul Convention, on equality between women
           and men, on the needs and rights of victims and on the prevention of secondary victimisation
           for all professional groups, in particular the healthcare sector, social workers and the
           judiciary, with all training supported and reinforced by clear protocols and guidelines that set
           the standards staff are expected to follow.92
           70.     CoE-GREVIO and CoE-CoP recommended that Slovenia provide for adequate
           specialist women’s support services throughout the country for all forms of violence against
           women covered by the Istanbul Convention, including by ensuring the sustainable
           functioning of a free-of-charge, 24/7 national telephone helpline for victims and the setting
           up of appropriate and easily accessible rape crisis and/or sexual violence referral centres, in
           sufficient numbers and meeting the needs of victims for immediate medical care, high-quality
           forensic examination, psychological and legal support, and referral to specialist
           organisations. 93
           71.    CoE-GREVIO encouraged the authorities to sustain and further develop their
           awareness-raising efforts by expanding their scope to all forms of violence covered by the
           Istanbul Convention and by ensuring their reach across all regions of Slovenia, including at
           the local level, and to continue to rely on expertise and experience of women’s specialist
           NGOs in the area of awareness raising by providing further funds for their regular awareness-
           raising activities.94
           72.     Noting the lack of an integrated system of data collection concerning all forms of
           violence across the law-enforcement and justice sector,95 CoE-GREVIO and CoE-CoP
           encouraged the authorities to ensure the comprehensive collection of disaggregated data in
           relation to all forms of violence covered by the Istanbul Convention, disaggregated by sex,
           age and type of violence as well as the relationship of the victim to the perpetrator.96

           Persons with disabilities
           73.    APE recommended that the authorities review national legislation, policies and
           programmes to harmonize them with the obligations under the CRPD, especially with human
           rights-based model of disability.97
           74.    JS1 stated that although there were programmes and services available in the
           community, e.g. day centres, community mental health centres, social programmes in the
           community, the main response to long-term mental health difficulties and intensive needs of
           people with disabilities were through special social care institutions. JS1 noted that most of
           those institutions had a “secure unit” where people who were considered dangerous to
           themselves or others were placed. Under the Mental Health Act, both voluntary and
           involuntary admissions in the secure units were possible.98
           75.    JS1 stated that the Slovenian legislation, especially the Mental Health Act needed to
           be aligned with the CRPD and the Guidelines on deinstitutionalisation. JS1 recommended
           ensuring a progressive transformation of the secure units into a series of community-based
           services, without seclusion and restraint, and adopting legislation, with the final goal of
           transforming all secure units until 2035. The Government must ban all infrastructural
           investments (excluding regular maintenance) in secure units and invest only in community-
           based services until the secure units were completely transformed into community-based
           services.99




8
                                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


Minorities
76.     AI stated that discrimination against and social exclusion of a large proportion of the
Roma continued, particularly in the south-east of the country. Many Roma in south-eastern
Slovenia continued to live in segregated settlements, without security of tenure and often
without essential services such as drinking water, sanitation and electricity. The persistent
challenges in accessing those services as well as the widespread poverty of many Roma
families, constituted a serious obstacle to their greater social inclusion and the full realisation
of their rights. Poor living conditions affecting the Roma community continued to negatively
impact their rights to education, work, an adequate standard of living and health, perpetuating
a cycle of poverty and marginalisation.100
77.     CoE-ACFC and CoE-CoM and recommended that the authorities ensure access to
drinking water, sanitation and electricity in relevant Roma settlements, promote equal
opportunities for Roma as regards access to private and public/social housing, and offer
adequate housing to Roma from settlements whose regularisation was not possible.101 AI
recommended that the authorities, where necessary and in agreement with affected Roma,
relocate families who were living in unsuitable housing to temporary, emergency shelters
until permanent, adequate housing can be guaranteed,102 and confer security of tenure on all
people living in informal settlements. AI stated that all persons must be provided with
protection against forced evictions.103 AI recommended that the authorities review and
monitor all spatial plans and housing programmes to ensure that they do not discriminate
against Roma or further entrench segregation. 104
78.    CoE-CoM and CoE-ACFC recommended that Slovenia strengthen the legal
protection of the German-speaking ethnic group and the new national communities and
consider granting them access to constitutionally protected national minority rights and
extending the full application of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities to persons belonging to those communities.105
79.     CoE-ECRML stated that the legal framework made no provision for the recognition
of Croatian, German and Serbian as regional or minority languages.106 CoE-CoM
recommended that Slovenia recognise Croatian, German and Serbian as minority languages
traditionally spoken in Slovenia.107
80.     AI explained that following Slovenia's declaration of independence in 1992, some
25,000 citizens of other former Yugoslav republics were unconstitutionally removed from
the official register of permanent residents in Slovenia. With the loss of status, they lost all
their economic and social rights tied to permanent resident status, and their right to remain in
Slovenia, rendering some people homeless. AI reported that more than 30 years, the
authorities continued to ignore the demands of the ‘erased’ (citizens from other Yugoslav
republics residing in Slovenia who were removed from public registries after Slovenia’s
declaration of independence in 1991) and the recommendations of civil society and
international human rights bodies.108
81.    CoE-Commissioner welcomed the official apology extended in 2022 by then
Slovenian President to the ‘erased’.109 However, CoE-Commissioner stated that many
‘erased’ were never able to recover their residence rights or receive compensation either
because of restrictive conditions or because they missed the deadline for applying. A few
‘erased’ persons still lived in Slovenia without any legal status.110 JS2 recommended that
Slovenia enact a law, allowing all those who were erased to regularize their status. The law
should not impose any restrictive conditions and must have an open deadline. JS2 stated that
Slovenia should adopt additional measures of fair redress.111

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons
82.     AI stated that people seeking to affirm their gender in official identity documents were
required to obtain a certificate from a health institution or a doctor, which in practice meant
obtaining a mental health disorder diagnosis. 112 AI recommended that Slovenia amend the
Rules on the Implementation of the Register of Deaths, Births and Marriages and ensure that
people who seek to affirm their gender in official documents do not need a medical certificate
as a prerequisite. 113 LEGEBITRA recommended that Slovenia introduce legislative and other



                                                                                                           9
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3


             policy measures ensuring legal gender recognition procedures that are transparent, accessible
             and based on self-determination.114
             83.    LEGEBITRA recommended that Slovenia introduce legislative and other policy
             measures, prohibiting medically unnecessary surgeries on intersex children and other medical
             intervention without their informed consent and ensure provision of adequate medical,
             psychological and social support to intersex persons and their families. 115
             84.     LEGEBITRA recommended that Slovenia adopt an anti-bullying strategy including
             strategies to combat bullying targeting LGBTIQ+ youth and introduce strategies on tackling
             violence and discrimination against them, accompanied by relevant action plans of
             implementation on national level and within local governments.116

             Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers
             85.     JS2 reported that Slovenia adopted Article 10 of the Foreigners Act in 2017, allowing
             the National Assembly to vote on suspending the right to asylum in case migration posed a
             threat to public order and internal safety of the Republic of Slovenia. JS2 explained that by
             activating the articles of the Foreigners act, foreigners would no longer have effective access
             to the asylum procedure in the country.117 JS2 recommended repealing the provisions of the
             Foreigners Act and ensuring that individuals have effective access to the asylum procedure.118
             86.    CoE-GREVIO and CoE-CoP recommended that Slovenia uphold the obligation to
             respect the principle of non-refoulement of victims of violence against women, in particular
             at border crossing points and ensure that victims of violence against women who are in need
             of protection, regardless of their status or residence, shall not be returned under any
             circumstances to any country where their life would be at risk or where they might be
             subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 119
             87.     AI referred to a decision of the Administrative Court in 2023, concluding that the
             practice of detaining asylum seekers before they lodged asylum applications violated their
             constitutional right to personal liberty.120 AI recommended that Slovenia end the practice of
             arbitrarily detaining asylum seekers before they formally lodge requests for international
             protection.121
             88.    AI reported that reception conditions for asylum-seekers were often inadequate due
             to persistent lack of space and significant overcrowding in reception centres.122 AI
             recommended that the authorities provide asylum-seekers in reception centres with adequate
             and safe accommodation, as required by national and international law and ensure their
             dignity and security.123

             Stateless persons
             89.   JS2 recommended that Slovenia establish a dedicated statelessness determination
             procedure and take concrete steps to improve the recording of statelessness. 124

Notes

         1   A/HRC/43/15 and the addendum A/HRC/43/15/Add.1, and A/HRC/43/2.
         2   The stakeholders listed below have contributed information for this summary; the full texts of all
             original submissions are available at: www.ohchr.org (one asterisk denotes a national human rights
             institution with A status).
             Civil society
             Individual submissions:
                      AI                             Amnesty International, London (United Kingdom of Great
                                                     Britain and Northern Ireland);
                      APE                            Advocate of the Principle of Equality, Ljubljana (Slovenia);
                      Broken Chalk                   The Broken Chalk, Amsterdam (Netherlands);
                      ECLJ                           European Centre for Law and Justice, Strasbourg (France);
                      ICAN                           International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons, Geneva
                                                     (Switzerland);
                      LEGEBITRA                      LEGEBITRA, Cultural information and counselling Centre,




10
                                                                                             A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3



                                      Ljubljana (Slovenia);
Joint submissions:
        JS1                           Joint submission 1 submitted by: The Faculty of Social
                                      Work; and the Institute of Criminology at the Faculty of Law
                                      (University of Ljubljana); Social Protection Institute; Institute
                                      for Culture of Diversity Open (a member of the Legal
                                      Network for the Protection of Democracy), Ljubljana
                                      (Slovenia);
       JS2                            Joint submission 2 submitted by: Legal Center for the
                                      Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (PIC) and
                                      the Institute for Contemporary Social and Political Studies
                                      (Peace Institute), Ljubljana (Slovenia);
       PTPR/JS3                       Joint submission 3 submitted by: Members of the
                                      Partnership in Truth for Peace and Reconciliation, namely the
                                      Society New Slovenian Covenant; the Society United at the
                                      Linden Tree of Reconciliation and the Justice and Peace
                                      Commission; Ljubljana (Slovenia).
National human rights institution:
       Ombudsman/HRORS               Human Rights Ombudsman of the Republic of Slovenia,
                                     Ljubljana (Slovenia);
Regional intergovernmental organization(s):
       CoE                           The Council of Europe, Strasbourg (France)
                                     Attachments:
                                     (CoE-Commissioner) Memorandum on Freedom of
                                     Expression and Media Freedom in Slovenia, by the
                                     Commissioner of Human Rights of the Council of Europe, 4
                                     June 2021, CommDH(2021)17;
                                     (CoE-Commissioner) Issue Paper, Dealing with the Past for a
                                     Better Future: Achieving justice, peace and social cohesion in
                                     the region of the former Yugoslavia, submitted by
                                     Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe,
                                     November, 2023;
                                     (CoE-ECRI) European Commission against Racism and
                                     Intolerance’s conclusions on the implementation of the
                                     recommendations in respect of Slovenia subject to interim
                                     follow-up, adopted on 7 December, 2021;
                                     (CoE-GRETA) - Group of Experts on Action against
                                     Trafficking in Human Beings, Evaluation Report on Access to
                                     Justice and Effective Remedies for Victims of Trafficking in
                                     Human Beings, Third Evaluation Round, adopted on 15 June
                                     2023;
                                     (CoE-ACFC) Advisory Committee on the Framework
                                     Convention for the Protection of National Minorities,
                                     Strasbourg, Fifth Opinion on Slovenia adopted on 22 May,
                                     2022;
                                     (CoE-CoM) Resolution CM/ResCMN (2022)9 of the
                                     Committee of Ministers on the implementation of the
                                     Framework Convention for the Protection of National
                                     Minorities by Slovenia, adopted on 30 November 2022;
                                     (CoE-ECRML) Report of the Committee of Experts on the
                                     application of the European Charter for the Regional and
                                     Minorities Languages, Fifth Report on Slovenia, adopted on 8
                                     November 2019;
                                     (CoE-CoM) Recommendation CM/RecChL(2020)2 of the
                                     Committee of Ministers to member States on the application
                                     of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
                                     by Slovenia; adopted on 23 September 2020;
                                     (CoE-GREVIO) Group of Experts on Action against Violence
                                     against Women and Domestic Violence, Baseline Evaluation
                                     Report on legislative and other measures giving effect to the
                                     provisions of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing
                                     and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic




                                                                                                              11
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3



                                               Violence (Istanbul Convention), adopted on 21 June 2021;
                                               (CoE-CoP) Recommendation on the implementation of the
                                               Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating
                                               Violence against Women and Domestic Violence by Slovenia,
                                               IC-CP/Inf(2021)10, adopted on 7 December 2021.
                  OSCE/ODIHR                   Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
                                               Rights/Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe,
                                               Warsaw (Poland).
         3  Ombudsman, p. 2.
         4  Ombudsman, p. 2.
          5 Ombudsman, p. 3.
          6 Ombudsman, p. 3.
          7 Ombudsman, p. 3.
          8 Ombudsman, p. 4.
          9 Ombudsman, p. 4.
         10 Ombudsman, p. 4.
         11 Ombudsman, p. 4.
         12 Ombudsman, p. 7.
         13 Ombudsman, p. 7.
         14 Ombudsman, p. 7.
         15 Ombudsman, p. 6.
         16 Ombudsman, p. 6.
         17 Ombudsman, p. 6.
         18 Ombudsman, p. 6.
         19 Ombudsman, p. 6.
         20 Ombudsman, p. 6.
         21 Ombudsman, p. 7.
         22 Ombudsman, p. 7.
         23 Ombudsman, p. 7.
         24 JS2, para. 43.
         25
            ICAN, p. 1.
         26 APE, para. 8.
         27 APE, para. 13.
         28 LEGEBITRA, para. 3.2.
         29 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 11.
         30 CoE-ACFC, p. 4, para. 4.
         31 CoE-ECRI, pp. 4-5. See also JS2, paras. 34 and 38.
         32 CoE-ACFC, p. 5, para. 12 and CoE-CoM, para.2. See also JS2, para. 47.
         33 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 12.
         34 APE, para. 13. See also LEGEBITRA, para. 1.3.
         35 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 12. LEGEBITRA, para. 1.3.
         36 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 12.
         37 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 12. See also JS2, para. 45.
         38 AI, para. 9.
         39 CoE-ECRI, p. 6. See also AI, para. 33.
         40 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 12. See also LEGEBITRA, para. 1.1 and JS2, para. 37.
         41 PTPR/JS3, paras. 2.3 and 3.1-3.11.
         42 PTPR/JS3, para. 3.6.
         43 PTPR/JS3, para. 5.
         44 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 48.
         45 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 83.
         46 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 6. See also CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 83.
         47 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 76.
         48 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 7.
         49 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 35.
         50 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 45.
         51 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 46.
         52 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 42.
         53 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 81.
         54 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 6.
         55 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 49 and 51.
         56 CoE-Commissioner, memorandum, para. 83.




12
                                                                                            A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3



57  CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 68.
58  CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 88.
 59 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 6.
 60 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 31.
 61 CoE-Commissioner, Memorandum, para. 29.
 62 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 5.
 63 OSCE/ODIHR, para. 8.
 64 ECLJ, paras. 16 and 18.
 65 ECLJ, para. 24.
 66 CoE-GRETA, paras. 161 and 169.
 67 CoE-GRETA, para. 161.
 68 CoE-GRETA, para. 102.
 69 CoE-GRETA, para. 51.
 70 CoE-GRETA, para. 134.
 71 CoE-GRETA, para. 96.
 72 CoE-GRETA, paras. 135 and 154.
 73 AI, para. 1.
 74 AI, para. 2.
 75 AI, para. 40. See also APE, para. 31.
 76 Broken Chalk, p. 6.
 77 Broken Chalk, p. 6.
 78 CoE-ACFC, p. 4, para, 7.
 79 AI, para. 7.
 80 CoE-ACFC, p. 5, para, 17 and CoE-CoM, para. 7.
 81 Broken Chalk, p. 7. See also AI, para. 32.
 82 AI, para. 25.
 83 AI, para. 26.
 84 CoE-GRETA, para. 140.
 85 CoE-GRETA, para. 139.
 86 CoE-GREVIO, para. 42.
 87
    CoE-GREVIO, p. 6.
 88 AI, para. 23.
 89 AI, para. 39.
 90 CoE-GREVIO, para. 263.
 91 CoE-GREVIO, para. 314 and CoE-CoP, para. 9.
 92 CoE-GREVIO, para. 123 and CoE-CoP; para. 5.
 93 CoE-GREVIO paras. 178, 191 and 198, and CoE-CoP, para. 7.
 94 CoE-GREVIO, para. 98.
 95 CoE-GREVIO, p. 7.
 96 CoE-GREVIO, para. 72 and CoE-CoP, para. 1.
 97 APE, para. 27.
 98 JS1, para. 3 and 4.
 99 JS1, paras. 28 and 29.
100 AI, paras. 3 and 4. See also CoE-ACFC, p. 4, para, 2.
101 CoE-ACFC, p. 5, para, 11 and CoE-CoM Resolution, para. 1. See also AI, para. 31 and JS2, paras. 8–

    17.
102 AI, para. 28.
103 AI, para. 29.
104 AI, para. 30.
105 CoE-CoM, para. 4 and CoE-ACFC Resolution, p. 5, para, 14.
106 CoE-ECRML, p. 2.
107 CoE-CM, Recommendation, p. 2.
108 AI, para. 11.
109 CoE-Commissioner, Issue Paper, p. 48.
110 CoE-Commissioner, Issue Paper, p. 49. See also AI, para. 12.
111 JS2, para. 42. See also AI, para. 34.
112 AI, para. 14.
113 AI, para. 38.
114 LEGEBITRA, para. 2.1.
115 LEGEBITRA, para. 3.1 and 3.3.
116 LEGEBITRA, paras. 1.4 and 1.5.
117 JS2, paras. 19 and 23.




                                                                                                             13
A/HRC/WG.6/48/SVN/3



        118 JS2, paras. 24 and 44.
        119 CoE-GREVIO, para. 400 and CoE-CoP, para. 13.
        120 AI, para. 17.
        121 AI, para. 35.
        122 AI, para. 18.
        123 AI, para. 36.
        124 JS2, para. 43.




14
