
ADVANCE QUESTIONS TO SLOVENIAGenerated on  MERGEFIELD  Generated  \* MERGEFORMAT 22 Jan 2025 14:31

BELGIUM
Is the government of Slovenia considering ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the ILO Conventions on Domestic Workers (No. 189) and on Violence and Harassment (190)?”
What is the current status of the media bill? Will the government of Slovenia adopt legislative measures aimed at increasing the  safety of journalists and to promote media pluralism and transparency of media ownership, including by abolishing the crime of defamation?
Which follow-up has the government of Slovenia given to the recommendations from the Committee against Torture and the CEDAW-Committee concerning the rights of Roma, particularly regarding their access to education, employment, healthcare and adequate living conditions?
Notwithstanding the progress Slovenia has made regarding the criminalisation and prevention of gender-based violence and domestic violence, it remains a serious challenge. How is Slovenia encouraging the reporting of domestic violence? How will the government ensure that all reported cases are thoroughly and effectively investigated, perpetrators are prosecuted and appropriate sanctions are imposed. What steps are being taken to enhance support for survivors in terms of access to healthcare services and long-term shelters with a view to their physical safety?
Belgium congratulates Slovenia on the adoption of amendments to the Criminal Code’s section on ‘sexual integrity’, introducing a consent-based definition of rape. What measures will the government take to fully implement the adopted provisions of the Criminal Code covering the offences of rape and sexual violence and to ensure their effective application in practice by law-enforcement authorities, prosecutors and the judiciary? Will the government conduct trainings for all relevant professionals and develop and implement appropriate guidelines?
COSTA RICA
Joint submission on behalf of Costa Rica, the Maldives and Slovenia, as members part of the core group of the resolutions on the human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment: What progress has your country achieved in the national, regional or international implementation of the human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment? In this regard, could you provide some examples related to clean air, a safe climate, healthy and sustainably produced food, access to safe water and adequate sanitation, non-toxic environments in which to live, work, and play, healthy ecosystems and healthy biodiversity, or any other areas?
GERMANY
How many antisemitic incidents have Slovenian authorities registered since the beginning of 2023, and which concrete steps has Slovenia taken to implement the antisemitism strategy launched in 2023?
What is the rate of successful completion of primary school among children from Roma communities and how can this rate be elevated?
LIECHTENSTEIN
What steps has Slovenia taken to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (OP-CRC)?
PORTUGAL
PORTUGAL on behalf on the Group of Friends on NMIRF’s: Could the State-under-review describe its national mechanism or process responsible for coordinating the implementation of accepted UPR recommendations and the monitoring of progress and impact?
PORTUGAL on behalf on the Group of Friends on NMIRF’s: Has the State-under-review established a dedicated ‘national mechanism for implementation, reporting and follow-up’ (NMIRF) covering UPR recommendations, but also recommendations/observations generated by the UN human rights Treaty Bodies, the Special Procedures and relevant regional mechanisms, which, inter alia, clusters all the above, manages them in national databases, coordinates implementation actions across government, monitors progress and impact, and then streamline reporting procedures back to the UN? If so, could the State-under-review briefly share its experience on creating such mechanism, including challenges faced and lessons learnt, as well as any plans or needs to strengthen the NMIRF in the future?
SPAIN
In 2024, Slovenia obtained a score of 70.1 in the Gender Equality Index, a mark slightly below the EU mean. What measures is the Government planning to take to address the structural causes of gender-based violence?
In September 2022, the Slovenian Advocate of the Principle of Equality suggested drafting a National Equality Strategy for the LGBTI community, paired with an action plan to implement it, in order to reduce hate crimes. What progress has been made on this issue?
Currently, a group of 50 individuals reside in Slovenia without legal status, having been denied citizenship following the country’s independence in 1991. What measures is the Government taking to ensure compliance with their rights and to guarantee their access to essential services?
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
Following the 2021 introduction of a consent-based definition of rape, what plans does the Government of Slovenia have to promote societal understanding of and respect for this legislation?
What measures is the Government of Slovenia taking to increase the participation of women in public and political life?
What measures is the Government of Slovenia taking to ensure that Roma in all parts of Slovenia have effective access to adequate housing, public services, the formal labour market and high-quality education?
What steps is the Government of Slovenia taking to identify, respond to and protect vulnerable migrants, particularly unaccompanied or separated children?
What steps is the Government of Slovenia taking to encourage reporting of all forms of violence against women, including intimate partner violence, sexual violence and rape, stalking and online and technology-facilitated violence against women?
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
How does Slovenia assess the implementation of its National Programme of Measures for Roma for 2017-2021, particularly with respect to access to primary education, housing, and public services?
How does Slovenia plan to implement its national action strategy to promote equality for LGBTQI+ persons in all areas of life?
We commend the government for identifying more trafficking victims in 2023 and amending its law to give third country national crime victims, including trafficking victims, the right to apply for compensation but we are concerned that the government did not convict any traffickers for the third consecutive year.  What steps is the government taking to investigate and successfully prosecute trafficking crimes, and to proactively identify victims and refer to them to care, including labor trafficking victims, male victims, and asylum-seeking victims?
