             United Nations                                                               A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1
             General Assembly                                                    Distr.: General
                                                                                 15 August 2014

                                                                                 Original: English




Human Rights Council
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
Twentieth session
27 October–7 November 2014

            National report submitted in accordance with
            paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights
            Council resolution 16/21*
            Slovenia




         * The present document has been reproduced as received. Its content does not imply the
           expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations.

GE.14-13493 (E)

*1413493*
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1



      I. Report drafting methodology
           1.     In March 2012, the Republic of Slovenia submitted mid-term report on the
           implementation of 2010 UPR recommendations to the OHCHR. Both the Interministerial
           Working Group for Human Rights (IWGHR) and NGOs have been regularly informed
           about their implementation. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) coordinated the
           drafting of the national report in co-operation with all relevant ministries and Government
           services. Prior to Government approval, the draft was examined by the IWGHR and
           communicated to NGOs and the Human Rights Ombudsman.


     II. Developments regarding the normative and institutional
         framework and the protection and promotion of human
         rights since 2010
           2.      Several changes in the institutional framework have been made since the
           presentation of the first report (A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1). The Office for Equal
           Opportunities (OEO) has been abolished and its remit taken over by the Ministry of Labour,
           Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities (MLFSAEO); the Office for National
           minorities has been included in the Prime Minister's Office; and the Office for Religious
           Communities has been operating within the Ministry of Culture (MoC). For the first time, a
           State Secretary responsible for dialogue with civil society and the coordination of citizens'
           initiatives has been appointed to the Prime Minister's Office. The Advocate of the Principle
           of Equality now operates within the MLFSAEO. NGOs are pointing out that the Advocate's
           role and the broader institutional framework for human rights protection should be
           enhanced. Slovenia is examining the modalities of including the Human Rights
           Ombudsman under Group A of the Paris Principles relating to the status of National Human
           Rights Institutions.
           3.     Since 2010 review Slovenia has adopted several new measures.
           4.      Several changes were introduced in the amended Criminal Code1, which entered
           into force in May 2012, including longer periods of limitation on the execution of
           sentences, revised definitions of the offences of terrorism and trafficking in human beings
           (THB), the introduction of new offences of grooming persons under the age of 15 for
           sexual purposes, and intentional access to pornographic material by using information and
           communication technologies. Exploitation through prostitution has been defined as an
           aggravated offence in cases when the victim is a minor, and a more severe sentence is
           imposed for the abuse of minors in order to produce material of a pornographic nature or
           the use of minors in pornographic performances. The provision on public incitement to
           hatred, violence or intolerance was also amended; now ethnic symbols are classified as a
           protected category, and web publication of words referring to ethnicity is considered an
           aggravated offence. Following the ratification of the Kampala amendments to the Rome
           Statute of the ICC, a more precise definition of the crime of aggression was included in the
           Code and war crimes were extended to the use of poisons, gases and 'dumdum bullets' also
           in internal conflicts. The amended Code also restricted the liability of responsible editors
           for criminal offences committed by publication; editors are not liable if the authors are
           known and consented to the publication and if nothing would impede their prosecution.
           There is no liability for administrators of freely-accessible websites allowing real-time
           comments without prior approval where the administrator cannot prevent their publication.
           5.     At the same time, the amended Criminal Procedure Act introduced a so-
           called preliminary hearing at which the defendant can enter into a plea bargain with the



2
                                                                                   A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


plaintiff and plead guilty. As a consequence, such proceedings are limited to a sentencing
hearing, and the sentence may be reduced below the statutory minimum.
6.      In the reference period, legislative and policy activities related to preventing and
combating THB were drafted in accordance with EU documents and guidelines2. Article
113 of the Criminal Code which deals with THB was expanded to include a new mode of
culpability. Apart from sexual exploitation, forced labour, enslavement and servitude,
trafficking may also serve the purpose of the use of traded persons for the perpetration of
offences (e.g. recruitment for street-theft). The first paragraph was amended to dispel any
doubts as to whether THB with the consent of the injured person constitutes an offence. In
the second paragraph, “giving or receiving payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a
person having control over another person” was included as an aggravated form of this
offence. A new third paragraph was added to Article 199 (Undeclared Employment),
explicitly referring to the exploitation of victims of THB.
7.      In 2013, the National Assembly (NA) passed a constitutional act on constitutional
amendments3. Accordingly, a legislative referendum may be called by 40,000 voters, and
no longer by a third of deputies or by members of the National Council. The Constitution
now defines issues on which it is not possible to hold a referendum, i.e. laws ratifying
treaties and laws intended to rectify non-constitutional situations concerning human rights.
8.      Since 2008, the economic crisis has also affected various social rights. Due to
soaring unemployment and diminished income among the general population, the number
of people at risk of poverty has been increasing since 2009 among all social groups and in
all household types (from 11.3% in 2009 to 13.5% in 2012). The risk is high also among
people above the age of 65 (19.6% in 2012), especially elderly women living alone. The
risk of poverty among children increased from 11.2% in 2009 to 13.5% in 2012. The share
of persons who are severely materially deprived (by at least 4 out of 9 elements of
deprivation) was 6.1% in 2009 and 6.6% in 2012. NGOs note the increasing number of
persons without adequate health insurance.
9.     Due to the harsh social situation, and despite adopting austerity measures for budget
consolidation, the Government is trying to safeguard the rights and status of the most
vulnerable population groups. In its strategic documents (e.g. the Resolution on the
National Social Assistance Programme 2013–2020, adopted by the NA in April 2013) and
the National Reform Programmes4, Slovenia is aiming to reduce the number of persons at
risk of poverty or social exclusion by 40,000 by 2020 (compared to 2008). Despite the
grave social situation, the system of social transfers is still quite effective in mitigating
poverty. The effect of social transfers (pensions excluded) on reducing the risk of poverty
in 2012 was 46.4%, ranking Slovenia among EU Member States with social transfers
(pensions excluded) most affecting the risk of poverty rates5. Slovenia is still among
countries with relatively small inequalities in income distribution. In 2012, the Gini
coefficient was 23.7%6.
10.    In 2010, two new social acts were passed (the Exercise of Rights to Public Funds
Act7 and the Social Assistance Benefits Act8), regulating the rights provided from public
funds dependent on the material status of individuals and families. Both acts took effect in
January 2012. The new social legislation was aimed at establishing a more just and
sustainable system of granting public benefits dependent on the material (income and
property) status. However, it resulted in a reduction of public funds and the number of
beneficiaries. Based on analyses of the implementation of the new legislation and
comments of the expert public, in 2013 the MLFSAEO drafted the Act Amending the
Social Protection Benefits Act9 and the Act Amending the Exercise of Rights to Public
Funds Act10. The new amendments increase the amount of public funds available to certain
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, thus improving their material status. In addition, the
number of beneficiaries of cash social assistance and income support has increased, the


                                                                                                     3
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


           conditions for obtaining extraordinary cash social assistance have improved, and seasonal
           fluctuations in periodical income are taken into account.
           11.    Apart from cash social assistance provided directly to beneficiaries, MLFSAEO has
           been co-financing various social security programmes, which are carried out by NGOs.
           These usually target the most vulnerable groups. The state allocates funds for the operation
           of humanitarian NGOs in the field and their programmes. NGOs act as partners in
           addressing social distress.
           12.     In education, the amended Placement of Children with Special Needs Act11 re-
           defines the placement procedure in accordance to the children's special education needs. In
           2011, a White Paper on Education in Slovenia was published, which includes an analysis of
           the school system and proposes systemic solutions. This core curricular document defines
           the basic education objectives of educational institutions. Three important long-term
           resolutions have been adopted: the Resolution on the National Programme for Youth 2013–
           202212, the Resolution on National Programme of Adult Education 2012–202013 and the
           Resolution on the National Programme of Higher Education 2011–202014. In September
           2010, new Rules on School Order in Secondary Schools15 entered into force, stipulating the
           rights and obligations of, and prohibitions for, students during school classes, the method of
           exercising rights, fulfilling obligations and actions in cases of breaches defined in the Rules
           and general acts, and schools’ obligations.
           13.     In January 2014, the Government adopted a Youth Guarantee scheme and an
           implementation plan for 2014–2015. Its key objectives are: providing for a smooth
           transition between school and work; the faster integration of unemployed young people in
           the labour market; reduction of the unemployment rate. By adopting the Youth Guarantee,
           Slovenia undertook to offer employment to every young person between 15 and 29 years of
           age (including internship), in-service training, enrolment in formal education or a shorter
           form of institutionalised or practical training within four months of signing on the
           unemployment register with the Employment Service of Slovenia.
           14.    One of the main objectives of the recent labour legislation reform was to reduce
           labour market segmentation by amending legislation16 relating to the job security. Specific
           provisions on concluding contracts for a definite period and measures guaranteeing greater
           security for the most vulnerable groups were part of the reform. Another new provision is
           the right to severance pay on the expiry of an employment contract for a definite period of
           time. Additional measures for reducing labour market segmentation are included in the new
           pension legislation. The amended Pension and Disability Insurance Act provides for
           employer allowances in employing elderly and young workers, mothers caring for a child
           under three years of age, and persons registering as self-employed for the first time. A
           specific issue that has to be tackled with regard to labour market segmentation is student
           work17.
           15.     Since 2010 numerous regulations were adopted in an effort to codify health care.
           The amended Health Services Act18 enhanced public health activities, guaranteeing high-
           quality public health service with the available funds, while attaining maximum benefits
           and the satisfaction of its users. Amendments to the Health Care and Health Insurance Act19
           strove to attain more equal conditions for all liable for the payment of health insurance
           contributions, lower coverage from compulsory health insurance, the inclusion of
           therapeutic groups of medications in the supply of medicinal products system and lower
           sick pay for the first 90 days of sick leave. The 2013 amendments to the Health Care and
           Health Insurance Act20 remedied certain imbalances in compulsory health insurance
           contributions, increasing the solidarity of insured persons. The Directive on the application
           of patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare was transposed into the Slovenian legislation.




4
                                                                                    A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


16.     Regarding adequate housing, the number of beneficiaries has been increasing since
the introduction of housing subsidies, particularly in urban municipalities.21 The need for
housing units is increasing as well; according to a 2012 estimate, an additional 600 units are
needed. A National Housing Programme for the period 2014–2023 is being drafted to
replace the abolished savings scheme22, with more effective measures guaranteeing
adequate housing for young people and other vulnerable population groups.
17.     A healthy and clean environment is highly valued by Slovenian citizens and the
right to a healthy living environment is enshrined in the Constitution and regulated by the
Environment Protection Act. The latter was adopted on 22 April 2004 and last amended in
October 2013 in order to rectify certain violations noted by the European Commission and
to bring the act up to date with current trends and insights and the state of the global
environment. The amended act allows for greater public influence on the regulation of
environmental issues. The Government's main strategic environment tasks are environment
protection and prevention of degradation by means of planning policies and measures to
guarantee quality ambient air, especially in areas where permitted levels of pollutants have
been persistently exceeded, with considerable progress having been made. The Government
also strives to conserve the ecosystems, nature and water resources, including access to
drinking water by completing the water supply network and waste management
infrastructure. Special concern is devoted to the sustainable use of natural resources and the
promotion of sustainable production and consumption.
18.     In May 2010, Catarina de Albuquerque, UN Special Rapporteur on the human
right to safe drinking water and sanitation, visited Slovenia as the first UN Human
Rights Council special procedure mandate holder. Apart from her generally positive
assessment of the visit and situation in Slovenia, her final report includes several critical
remarks on the access of the Roma community in the Dolenjska region to water and
sanitation; the issue is being addressed systematically to achieve long-term results23.
19.     From 7 to 9 April 2014, Marta Santos Pais, Special Representative of the UN
Secretary-General on Violence against Children, participated in the 24th session of the
National Children's Parliament and a round-table organised by the MFA to mark the 25th
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. During her visit, she held talks
with numerous representatives of Government and NGOs and attended a celebration on 8
April, International Roma Day.
20.    To resolve the issue of persons erased from the Register of Permanent Residents,
the Act Regulating the Legal Status of Citizens of Former Yugoslavia Living in Slovenia24
was adopted in 2010 and took effect on 24 July 2010.25 It allowed persons erased from the
Register of Permanent Residents to regulate their status, with the possibility of obtaining a
permanent residence permit dating from the erasure onwards (with retroactive effect).
21.     Additionally, in 2013 a special compensation scheme was adopted guaranteeing just
satisfaction for persons whose human rights had been violated in this manner: the Act on
Compensations for Persons Erased from the Register of Permanent Residents26 entered into
force on 18 December 2013, with effect from 18 June 2014.
22.    Since 2010 several amendments to the International Protection Act27 were
adopted. Most of them raised the standards of procedures for obtaining international
protection, gave more rights to applicants and improved the conditions for the successful
integration of persons under international protection. The Act introduced an allowance for
international protection applicants and reduced the period for their inclusion in the labour
market, while granting equal conditions for their access to higher and university education
as those afforded to Slovenian citizens. The amount of financial assistance for displaced
applicants was reduced, while they may still decide to stay at an Asylum Centre that
provides full board. Pro bono legal aid to international protection applicants in appeal


                                                                                                      5
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


           procedures is guaranteed through a legal aid project funded by the responsible ministry with
           the assistance of the European Refugee Fund and continually provided by NGOs in the
           Asylum Centre on a daily basis, allowing for effective and high-quality exercise of
           applicants' rights in the procedure. Legal representation of unaccompanied minors has been
           comprehensively regulated and the scope of their health-care rights has been expanded.
           23.    In 2011, a new Aliens Act28 entered into force, based on that of 1999. It follows the
           European Commission guidelines on free movement of persons. New features include
           national interest when granting a residence permit, and expanded rights and relief for
           migrants. Consequently, aliens facing deportation have more rights; they can leave the
           country voluntarily and are guaranteed legal protection. The Act also provides for the
           protection of rights of aliens who are victims of illegal employment by allowing them to
           acquire permission to stay and subsequently a residence permit if they are willing to
           cooperate with the judicial authorities in (criminal and civil) proceedings against the
           employer. The new Act explicitly stipulates the possibility of regulating the status of
           victims of THB. In April 2014, a law amending the Aliens Act29 was passed, which will
           enter into force on 1 January 2015. Together with the act amending the Employment and
           Work of Aliens Act, it introduces a single residence and work permit and facilitates
           obtaining a residence permit for certain categories of aliens by removing administrative
           obstacles and introducing the 'one-stop shop' principle. The legislation was also adapted to
           EU standards on readmission.
           24.     The amended Elementary School Act30 of 2011 is also pertinent for aliens. It
           stipulates organisation of Slovene language and culture classes for children living in
           Slovenia whose mother tongue is not Slovene upon their enrolment in school, as well as
           classes in their mother tongue and culture, in cooperation with their countries of origin. In
           order to assist pre-school institutions and schools in planning education activities involving
           immigrant children, in 2012 the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport (MESS) adopted
           amended Guidelines for the inclusion of pre-school and school migrant children. MESS co-
           finances elective classes in mother tongue and culture for children of immigrants, by
           providing a lump sum payment for each student attending. Teachers are paid either by the
           country concerned, parents or societies. Since August 2013, MESS has financed a project
           "Training Professionals to Achieve Better Integration of Basic and Secondary School
           Immigrant Students into the Educational System". The primary objective is to facilitate the
           integration of children from minority communities and of immigrants into the educational
           system, and enhance the intercultural competences of teachers and other professionals
           concerned.
           25.     On 5 June 2010, the Integrity and Prevention of Corruption Act31 entered into
           force, expanding the remit of the Commission for the Prevention of Corruption and
           introducing a politically more independent system for appointing its members, i.e.
           appointment by the President on the proposal of a special panel. Having additional
           competences, the Commission has become a minor offence authority. On suspicion of a
           crime of corruption, it informs the Police and the Prosecutor's Office thereof. In 2011, the
           Act was twice amended, extending the Commission's mandate. Nonetheless, the
           Commission assesses that the Act is still deficient and unclear in certain parts, especially
           regarding the Commission's statutory competences for effective supervision and
           sanctioning, and the lack of qualified personnel to perform its tasks. The programme of
           Government measures to combat corruption, which will be implemented in 2014 and 2015,
           foresees the reorganisation of the Commission, which will be accompanied by amendments
           to the Act enhancing the supervisory competences of the Commission and establishing an
           independent supervisory body to assess its work in terms of integrity, objectivity, and
           efficiency.




6
                                                                                     A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


26.    In Slovenia, freedom of conscience is guaranteed in accordance with international
conventions, the Constitution and partially by the Religious Freedom Act32. In 2010, the
Constitutional Court included the right to legal personality in the definition of religious
freedom and thus repealed the strict criteria for registering a religious community under the
Religious Freedom Act. A religious community may now be established by ten adult
residents33. Owing to the constitutional separation between the state and religious
communities, the Constitutional Court prohibited the employment of religious workers in
prisons and hospitals for performing religious activities.
27.    Since December 2011, Slovenia has been a full member of the International
Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA). The Slovenian Delegation to the IHRA will
focus also on the 'hushed-up' genocide of the Roma during World War II.
28.    The IWGHR coordinates reporting in accordance with the ratified treaties and other
mechanisms for the protection of human rights and monitors the implementation of
Slovenia's international commitments in this area, including voluntary commitments
undertaken in view of its candidacy for membership of the UN Human Rights Council for
the 2016–18. IWGHR, headed by the MFA, includes representatives of all the ministries,
the Statistical Office, the Prime Minister's Office, civil society and academia. It biannually
presents its reports to the Government, and it may in its report include proposals for
decisions to be taken by the Government.
29.     Since 2010, Slovenia signed and ratified the following international treaties:
      • Council of Europe (CoE) Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual
        Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (Lanzarote Convention); ratified on 26 September
        2013, entered into force on 1 January 2014;
      • CoE Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and
        Domestic Violence; signed on 8 September 2011;
      • Protocol No. 15 amending the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
        Fundamental Freedoms; signed on 24 June 2013;
      • Protocol No. 16 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
        Fundamental Freedoms; signed on 2 October 2013;
      • Third Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition; signed on 10
        November 2010, ratification pending – to be considered by the NA;
      • Fourth Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition; signed on 20
        September 2012, ratification pending – to be considered by the NA;
      • Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons; ratified
        on 26 September2013, entered into force on 1 January 2014;
      • Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a
        Communications Procedure; signed on 28 February 2012;
      • Convention Concerning Tripartite Consultations to Promote the Implementation of
        International Labour Standards (ILO Convention 144); ratified on 29 June 2011,
        entered into force on 29 June 2012;
      • Convention Concerning Protection of the Right to Organise and Procedures for
        Determining Conditions of Employment in the Public Service (ILO Convention
        151); ratified on 20 September 2010, entered into force on 20 September 2011;
      • Convention Concerning the Revision of the Maternity Protection Convention
        (Revised), 1952 (ILO Convention 183); ratified on 1 March 2010, entered into force
        on 1 March 2011;


                                                                                                       7
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


                   • Protocol of 2000 to the Occupational Safety and Health Convention (ILO
                     Convention 155), 1981; ratified on 1 March 2010, entered into force on 1 March
                     2011;
                   • Convention Concerning Night Work (ILO Convention 171); ratified on 10 February
                     2014;
                   • Convention Concerning the Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and
                     Health (ILO Convention 187); ratified on 10 February 2014.
           30.    In 2013, Slovenia's 4th Report to the CoE according to the European Charter for
           Regional or Minority Languages was evaluated and the relevant Committee visited
           Slovenia. In 2014, the country is submitting periodic reports under the ICCPR (3rd report),
           the ICERD (8th to 11th periodic reports), the CRPD (initial report), the CEDAW (5th and
           6th periodic reports) and a Common Core Document. In November 2014, Slovenia will
           present its 2nd periodic report under the ICESCR.


     III Implementation of adopted recommendations of the first
         round of the UPR

      A.   Rule of law: court backlogs, trial without undue delay, fair trial and ill
           treatment by law enforcement officials (recommendations 30–31, 54–
           57)

           31.    Judicial reform aimed at increasing efficiency has been implemented; Slovenia is
           continuing its projects to reduce court backlogs. As a result, backlogs have been reduced to
           the point where they can no longer be considered a systemic problem.

                                                                                                        Percentage
                                                                                                          decrease
           Courts          30.12.2008   31.12.2009   31.12.2010   31.12.2011   31.12.2012   30.9.2013 (2008–2013)

           Higher-
           instance              667          242          326          788        1,005         999     +49.8%
           District           10,748       14,452       24,275       24,121       22,355      20,192     +87.8%
           Local            262,656      239,477      236,043      215,733      175,475     160,777       -38.8%
           Total            274,071      254,171      260,644      240,642      198,835     181,968       -33.7%

           Table 1: Backlogs in courts of general jurisdiction of first and second instance as at 30
           September 2013.
           32.     A comparison of data from the previous report from 31 December 2008 with the
           recent data for the first nine months of 2013 indicates that the total number of backlogs in
           the courts of first and second instance was reduced by more than a third. This is a
           significant step forward, given that since 2009 stricter criteria were adopted for designating
           a case as backlog34.
           33.    A certain increase in the volume of court backlogs at second-instance higher courts
           and first-instance district courts, which, however, does not have significant effect on the
           total number of court backlogs, is the result of the 'soft' reorganisation of courts of first
           instance imposed by the Act Amending the Courts Act35, which concentrated judicial
           authority in 11 districts as of 1 January 201036. Since the focus is now on districts, the
           number of court backlogs has reduced in local courts, while in district courts it has slightly
           increased (in absolute terms). It should also be noted that there are 50 fewer judges


8
                                                                                        A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


     compared to 2010, while the trend of reducing the burden of pending cases and court
     backlogs is proceeding at the same pace.
     34.    The Commitment to citizens to improve the situation in the judiciary was signed by
     the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and the President of the Supreme Court in June
     2013. In addition to legislative measures, pending cases – especially concerning
     commercial disputes – are also being successfully tackled through organisational measures,
     particularly the so-called Procedural Triage, which was first implemented in 2012.
     35.    In 2013, police legislation was reformed in order to provide for more operational
     autonomy, for the protection of freedom and human rights in police procedures, and to
     ensure safety. This resulted in a higher level of human rights and freedoms, particularly
     concerning cases in which police officers abuse their powers to infringe people’s rights and
     freedoms. Apart from internal supervision performed by the Ministry of the Interior (MoI)
     through managing police tasks and addressing complaints over the work of police officers
     and the Police themselves, police work is also scrutinised by several other institutions and
     bodies37 to provide for independent, unbiased, timely, transparent, thorough and efficient
     investigations of alleged violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms during
     police procedures.
     36.    Since 2010, training of police officers and social services staff has been carried out
     by the Police within the new Recognising stereotypes, overcoming prejudice and
     eliminating discrimination in a multicultural society programme. Police officers also attend
     Romani classes. Apart from regular training on border issues and aliens, border police
     officers attend lectures on combating cultural stereotypes and discrimination against aliens
     and training on conducting interviews with illegal migrants. The Legal-informational centre
     for NGO’s and the IOM cooperate with the Police during readmission procedures and offer
     pro bono legal aid to aliens. The officer higher education study programme, which was
     converted into a higher professional educational degree (6th level) in 2013, provides police
     officers with in-depth knowledge and skills for performing police duties, including
     protecting human rights in police procedures.


B.   Anti-discrimination measures (recommendations 19, 21, 26, 63, 64)

     37.     In 2010 and 2011, the OEO implemented the project Achieve Equality within
     Diversity, which included raising awareness of the Equal in Diversity – Getting There in
     society and pointing to the fact that no one should be discriminated on the grounds of race
     or ethnic affiliation, disability, age, religion or belief, gender, sexual orientation or any
     other personal circumstance. Guidelines for encouraging equality and protection against
     discrimination were drafted, workshops and training were organised for NGOs, civil
     servants at the national and local levels, judges and state prosecutors. There was an
     extensive media campaign aimed at raising awareness of the existence, prohibition and
     negative effects of discrimination, promoting diversity, multiculturalism and tolerance in
     general, irrespective of gender, nationality, race and ethnic origin, religion or belief,
     disability, age or sexual orientation. The website www.zagovornik.gov.si was launched,
     providing information about the project, basic facts about discrimination, tips and advice on
     what to do in cases of discrimination and the possibility of filing a petition for a case of
     alleged discrimination to be considered by the Advocate of the Principle of Equality.
     Leaflets with this information were published in 11 languages.
     38.     In addition to the Criminal Code, which, under certain conditions, defines public
     incitement to hatred and intolerance as an offence, such heinous acts are also prohibited
     by the Media Act38, which explicitly prohibits the dissemination of programming that
     encourages ethnic, racial, religious, sexual or any other inequality, or violence and war, or
     incites ethnic, racial, religious, sexual or any other hatred and intolerance. Incitement to

                                                                                                          9
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


            intolerance also constitutes an offence under Article 20 of the Protection of Public Order
            Act39, when violent and audacious behaviour, misbehaviour, damage to official inscriptions,
            markings or decisions, writing on buildings and the destruction of state symbols is
            implemented for the purpose of inciting national, racial, sexual, ethnic, religious and
            political intolerance or intolerance of sexual orientation.
            39.    In the period 2011–2013, the Culture and Media Inspectorate received four reports
            of alleged violations of the Media Act relating to the prohibition of hate speech and
            incitement to discrimination and intolerance through the media, but the inspection
            procedure was not initiated because no elements of hate speech were detected in the cases
            concerned. In 2011, the Inspectorate, having detected an alleged criminal offence of public
            incitement to hatred, violence or intolerance pursuant to the first and third paragraphs of
            Article 297 of the Criminal Code, committed through electronic publication, filed a
            criminal complaint against the responsible persons with the competent prosecutor’s office.
            40.    To prevent or limit hate speech and other illegal content on the Internet and in online
            media, the Slovenian Internet reporting portal Web Eye, Spletno-oko.si, for anonymous
            reporting of hate speech and other illegal content disseminated via the Internet has proved
            highly effective. Spletno-oko.si operates under the Safer Internet Plus programme and the
            INHOPE organisation. The Office of the State Prosecutor General, the police and
            representatives of mass media and other organisations involved in the protection of
            children's rights cooperate in this project as members of the advisory body. Since 2013, the
            Office of Slovenia for Youth has been coordinating the CoE No hate speech movement
            campaign. It includes youth structures and CoE organisations involved with young people
            and focuses on informal education, intercultural dialogue and hate speech.
            41.    The annual call for co-financing mass media programmes includes an objective "the
            culture of public dialogue". The part of the call aimed at programmes of special importance
            in the public and cultural interests of Slovenia defined "ensuring compliance with the
            principles of cultural diversity, the principle of equal opportunities of sexes and promoting
            tolerance" as one of the criteria for assessing individual projects submitted by the media.
            For reasons of freedom of expression of the media and protection of editorial independence,
            direct media interference by the state is not possible and not allowed.
            42.    The ethical behaviour of deputies is the responsibility of the NA. Outside the scope
            of deputy immunity (e.g. outside NA sessions), the prohibition of hate speech applies also
            to deputies.

       1.   Gender equality and empowerment of women (recommendations 4, 14, 22, 23, 25, 65–
            70, 74)
            43.   Within biannual action plans in accordance with the National Programme for Equal
            Opportunities for Women and Men 2005–2013, Slovenia continued its endeavours to
            promote gender equality and stop discrimination against women.
            44.    In cooperation with the relevant partners, the Government carried out activities
            aimed at increasing the number of women in top-level positions and in decision-making in
            business and their empowerment in science and research. Among other things, the OEO
            organised a conference on the role of management in shaping non-discriminatory policies,
            together with eliminating gender-based discrimination; it conducted a survey on gender
            balance in decision-making positions in the business sector, organised a press conference
            "Have we really tapped the full potential?", which focused on gender imbalance in
            decision-making positions, published a brochure under the same title, and cooperated with
            the Managers' Association – Women Managers' Section on drafting guidelines for
            encouraging equality in decision-making business positions.



10
                                                                                    A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


45.    Legislation stipulating a minimum quota of women and men on candidate lists
contributed to an increased share of women in political decision-making positions. A
draft law amending the NA Elections Act is being considered; it envisages at least a
40%40share of women and men on candidate lists and amends the rules on the composition
of candidate lists. With the parliamentary elections on 4 December 2011, the share of
women deputies increased considerably and women account for a third of all deputies in the
NA. On 27 February 2013, a woman was elected Prime Minister for the first time.
46.     Following the 2010 local elections, the OEO commissioned an analysis to examine
the impact of gender quotas on the electability of women. In the 2010 elections, 11.95% of
women stood for mayor and 10 were elected (5%). The share of women on candidate lists
for a seat on town and municipal councils has increased to 38%, with 23.26% having been
elected. In areas where the Roma community autochthonously resides, one female
councillor was elected among 18 Roma councillors. The OEO co-funded an analysis of the
impact of electoral districts on the electability of women to the NA. In 2011, it organised a
Mentoring Day with a Female Politician in cooperation with the Government, the NA and
the universities of Ljubljana, Maribor and Primorska.41
47.    Equal pay for women and men for equal work is guaranteed by the Employment
Relationship Act, which also incorporates the relevant recommendations of the ILO. The
Government did not adopt any particular measures to reduce the male-female income
disparity, except for awareness rising on the persisting gender pay gap and its causes on the
occasion of European Equal Pay Day. The 2012 data show that the average pay of women
was 4.6% below the average pay of men, making it one of the smallest disparities in the
EU.
48.    The prohibition of sexual harassment is regulated by the Employment Relationship
Act. The Health and Safety at Work Act stipulates that at workplaces where there is higher
risk of third-party violence, the employer must ensure a design and equipment of the
workplace that reduces the risk of violence and allows assistance to be provided at the
workplace under threat. Pursuant to the Decree on measures for protecting the worker's
dignity at work in state administration42, each authority must have at least one counsellor to
provide information and assistance to victims.
49.    The Government pursues various activities to identify and eliminate stereotypes,
particularly by organising consultations, training and seminars, by drafting analyses and
studies on the division of power between women and men in different areas, by
encouraging fathers to assume a more active role in child care and equal division of tasks
within the family, as well as responsible partnership and parenting.
50.    Slovenia withdrew from the Night Work (Women) Convention43, as the conditions
are too limiting and imply discrimination. Despite the withdrawal, women workers will not
remain without protection. The current legislation on night work guarantees special
protection for night workers regardless of their gender and the tasks they perform.
51.    Since 2004, a working group has been operating within the Institute of Public Health
of Slovenia (IPHS) which regularly analyses all cases of maternal death. Each case is
scrutinised following a single protocol. Based on the findings, the group publishes a
comprehensive report every three years, with recommendations for clinical and public
health measures in the field of reproductive health, focusing particularly on the importance
of socio-economic factors, the detection and treatment of mental disorders, and the need for
education and awareness raising among the general public and medical professionals.
Between 2010 and 2013, several symposia were dedicated to the main causes of maternal
death in Slovenia, and the national association of perinatal medicine adopted clinical
guidelines. The Ministry of Health (MoH) co-finances programmes on reproductive health
and rights at the national, regional and local levels. Since post-natal mental disorders and


                                                                                                     11
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


            suicide are among the main causes of maternal death in Slovenia, in 2013 the IPHS
            published a draft programme for the detection and treatment of mental problems and
            disorders in the perinatal period, which will serve as the basis for further activities.

       2.   Same-sex partnerships (recommendations 5, 6, 7, 8, 22)
            52.     On 16 June 2011, the NA adopted the Family Code, according to which a same-sex
            union (partnership, extramarital union) is equal to a union between a man and a woman.
            The Act was rejected in a referendum held on 25 March 2012, with 45.45% voting for its
            adoption and 54.55% against. The relevant ministry has prepared working documents for a
            new family code and a draft law on civil partnership. In April 2014, the draft law was
            submitted for inter-ministerial consideration and public debate. The procedure has been
            suspended following the resignation of the Government. At the 2nd IDAHO Forum in May
            2014, Slovenia was among 17 countries that signed the Declaration of Intent, which draws
            attention to the issues of homophobia and transphobia.

       3.   Rights of persons with disabilities (recommendations 4, 22)
            53.    Slovenia boasts a modern disability policy. In 2008, it ratified the CRPD and its
            optional protocol.
            54.     November 2010 saw the adoption of the Act Guaranteeing Equal Opportunities for
            Persons with Disabilities44, which is intended to prevent and stop discrimination based on
            disability and create equal opportunities for persons with disabilities in all spheres of life.
            Its basic principles are the guarantee of equal opportunities as a planned activity and access
            of persons with disabilities to public services, the physical environment, goods and
            services, information, and communications. The Act also stipulates the right to equal
            participation in procedures before public authorities. It refers to both direct and indirect
            discrimination on grounds of disability. The Act includes a definition of reasonable
            accommodation and of harassment on grounds of disability. Existing measures in other
            relevant regulations have been supplemented by new ones45.
            55.    The 2004 Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment of Disabled Persons Act46
            with amendments is the basic law on the employment of persons with disabilities. An
            analysis of its implementation shows the positive effect of the measures taken47. Despite the
            harsh economic and financial crisis, the share of persons with disabilities in employment
            has remained stable (about 4% of the active working population). Similarly, the share of
            persons with disabilities among the unemployed has remained the same (approximately
            14%). In 2013, almost 70% more persons with disabilities found new employment than in
            2008, before the onset of the crisis – a result of the active employment policy in this area:
            comprehensive, interconnected and combined measures of vocational rehabilitation,
            employment incentives and the quota system.
            56.     In January 2014, the Government adopted the Action Plan for Persons with
            Disabilities 2014–202148. It is aimed at promoting, protecting and guaranteeing the full and
            equal enjoyment of human rights of persons with disabilities and promoting respect for
            their dignity. The programme is based on 13 main objectives49, with 91 measures which
            thoroughly regulate all areas of their lives. An inter-ministerial working group, which
            brings together the main professional institutions and representative organisations of
            disabled persons, was appointed to implement and monitor these objectives and measures.
            It reports to the Government annually.




12
                                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


4.   Rights of national, Roma and other ethnic communities (recommendations 27–29, 71,
     73, 76, 89–92, 94, 95)
     57.   A new law on the autochthonous Italian and Hungarian national communities in
     Slovenia is being drafted. It will guarantee more consistent implementation of their rights
     which are already included in more than 100 sectoral acts.
     58.    Certain amendments to the 2007 Roma Community Act50 are being prepared in
     order to comprehensively regulate its status. The protection of the Roma community is
     enshrined in other laws51 and forms part of numerous programmes, strategies and
     resolutions.
     59.     In 2010, the Government adopted a National Programme of Measures for Roma for
     the Period 2010–2015, which is the national strategy for their social inclusion. Its
     implementation is monitored by the Government Commission for the Protection of the
     Roma Community. The Government reports annually to the NA on the implementation of
     the Act and the national strategy. The latter document defines priority areas52 for short- and
     long-term measures at the national and local community levels. The long-term objective
     and purpose of the adopted programme of measures is to contribute to the development of
     mutual understanding and dialogue between the Roma community and the majority
     population, and to promote the implementation of human and minority rights. The current
     strategy expires in 2015. A new strategy will be adopted for the 2015–2020 period. The
     implementation of measures is financed by the national and local budgets and from EU
     funds. Documents that will serve as a basis for drawing on these funds with regard to the
     social inclusion of Roma are being drafted and will be included in the 2015–2020 strategy.
     60.    The MoH implements measures to improve the health care of Roma. The IPHS
     guarantees the regular implementation of measures in areas populated by Roma, which are
     evaluated annually53.
     61.    With a view to improving the employability of Roma and reducing the number of
     unemployed, Roma are included in active employment policy programmes aimed at
     training, employment incentives and the creation of jobs and promotion of self-
     employment.
     62.     In 2011, MESS amended the Strategy of the education of Roma, which encourages
     their access to education, also by financing Roma teaching assistants. MESS provides funds
     for social incubators, which are important centres of extracurricular activities, as well as
     learning assistance for young and adult Roma within their communities. The Ministry
     prioritises the inclusion of Roma in pre-school institutions and finances several projects to
     stimulate cooperation among different local players54. MESS also sets more favourable
     norms and standards for classes with Roma pupils, provides funds for teaching aids, prints
     Roma fairy tales and works on Roma history and literature, as well as Romani language,
     and manuals for working with Roma pupils. Slovenian schools and pre-school institutions
     do not segregate Roma children. They attend regular classes, except those with special
     needs according to the Placement of Children with Special Needs Act.
     63.     In November 2011, the Government Commission for the Protection of the Roma
     Community approved the concept of modernising Roma settlements, i.e. good practices in
     resolving housing issues, which include the modernisation and development of Roma
     settlements, their public infrastructure, spatial continuity and interconnectedness with
     surrounding settlements, the participation of Roma in the development and maintenance of
     the settlement, and preservation and development of Roma culture.
     64.    The objective of this spatial planning policy is comprehensive integration of Roma
     into the Slovenian society, i.e. gradual formal, infrastructural and social integration of
     Roma settlements into the Slovenian settlement system, with concurrent rehabilitation of


                                                                                                          13
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


           these areas. This can only succeed in partnership between municipalities, the Roma and
           state institutions. Given the current legal order and applicable legislation in Slovenia,
           spatial planning is the exclusive responsibility of municipalities. These must include Roma
           settlements in their settlement systems and municipal spatial plans, enable their further
           development and legalisation, and provide them with public utilities.
           65.     Based on public tenders, the line ministries provide for the regulation of the basic
           infrastructure in Roma settlements (construction, renovation or modernisation of water
           supply networks, sewerage, connection to power supply networks, construction and
           reconstruction of local roads)55. In the 2014–2020 period, the relevant ministry will replace
           public tenders with a programme-based approach56.
           66.    In addition to the general voting right to which Roma are entitled as citizens of
           Slovenia, they also hold a special voting right in twenty municipalities where they have
           been historically present, which enables them to elect their own representative to the
           municipal council. In certain municipalities in which Roma have not been historically
           present and consequently have no representative on the municipal council, special
           municipal working bodies are set up to monitor the situation of the Roma community,
           through which Roma may engage with the municipality and present their own initiatives
           and proposals.
           67.    The MoC has been developing a dynamic model to protect the cultural rights of
           minorities, which includes the Roma community. On this basis various anti-discrimination
           measures, including the co-financing of Roma cultural projects. The Ministry also provides
           counselling, workshops and expert assistance for Roma.
           68.    Since 1990, the MoC has systematically implemented measures for minority
           communities, including those not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution. The rights of
           minorities are addressed in the context of support for human rights and cultural diversity. In
           compliance with Articles 14, 61 and 62 of the Constitution, members of all minority
           communities are guaranteed individual rights to preserve their own national, linguistic and
           cultural features. For a number of years, the Ministry has developed and, on the basis of
           regular evaluations, upgraded and improved the model for protecting the cultural rights of
           various minority groups, which also comprise ethnic minorities, including the national
           communities recognised under the Constitution, the Roma community and other minority
           ethnic communities.
           69.    Minority policy is implemented through a programme aimed at protecting their
           cultural identities and an integration programme aimed at improving access to cultural
           goods, services and creativity. The MoC strives to protect the cultural rights of minorities
           and other social groups with financial and organisational instruments57 as well as normative
           instruments58.
           70.     In 2012, the MoC commissioned a study "Ethnic Vitality of Areas Inhabited by
           Small Minority Ethnic Communities and Autochthonous Peoples", which was aimed at
           identifying the cultural needs and their articulation in areas populated by Gottschee German
           settlers, Serbs in Bela Krajina and Croats along the border with Croatia. The study shows
           that special attention should be devoted to regional integration and maintaining local
           identities.
           71.    In February 2011, the Slovenian NA adopted the Declaration of Slovenia on the
           Status of National Communities of Members of Nations of the Former SFRY in Slovenia59,
           which concerns the implementation of the rights of these communities in education as well
           as cultural and political participation. On 17 October 2013, the Government Council for
           Issues concerning the National Communities of Members of Nations of the Former SFRY
           in Slovenia was re-established on the basis of the provisions of the Declaration, as a
           consultative body of the Slovenian Government for the situation of these communities. All


14
                                                                                           A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


     representatives of national communities, ministries and government bodies are equal
     members of the Council, which addresses issues, requirements and proposals concerning
     the preservation, promotion and development of ethnic and national identities of members
     of all national communities.


C.   Violence against women and domestic violence (recommendations 18,
     23, 32–39, 72)

     72.    The Slovenian Criminal Code defines the criminal offence against marriage, family
     and children. Issue is also regulated by the Family Violence Prevention Act60. Domestic
     violence prevention campaigns are being implemented in cooperation with NGOs.
     73.    In 2009, Slovenia adopted the Resolution on the 2009–2014 National Programme on
     Prevention of Family Violence (NPPFV). This strategic document sets out objectives,
     measures and key players to reduce and prevent domestic violence. The document aims to
     combine measures implemented by various ministries and provides for effective activities
     to reduce domestic violence, both in terms of identification and prevention. Therefore, the
     Resolution also provides for the implementation of a national awareness-raising campaign
     on the issue of violence and for reducing the extent of such deviant behaviour in every
     society. Rules were adopted in certain fields to implement the 2008 Family Violence
     Prevention Act (FVPA), effectively provide assistance to children and cooperate with other
     authorities.
     74.     The two-year nation-wide awareness raising campaign "VESNA – to live a life free
     of violence" officially started on 7 March 2014 with a national conference. The target group
     is women of three generations (young women, adults and old women), for whom different,
     target-oriented activities have been envisaged. Activities are tailored to the needs and
     lifestyle of each target group.
     75.    Several other sector-specific implementing acts on education, health care, social
     security, and the police have been passed to implement the FVPA, effectively provide
     assistance to children and cooperate with other authorities61.
     76.     The Slovenian Research Agency, the OEO and the MoI/Police co-financed the target
     research project "Violence and Responses to it in the Private Sphere and Partnerships". At
     the end of 2010, the results of the first empirical national research on violence in the private
     sphere and partnerships were published, and followed at the end of 2011 by analyses on the
     work of the Police, courts and social services concerning violence against women and
     domestic violence. The research has shown that the number of cases of domestic violence
     that are detected, identified and processed by institutions is increasing. This is also due to
     the implementation of legislation that both enables and imposes the obligation of
     institutions to provide effective assistance to victims and to prosecute offenders. In
     addition, the number of cases processed also increased as a result of the victims’ increased
     willingness to seek help and the increased awareness and sensitivity of staff in institutions
     established to help such victims.
     77.     Adopted in 2013, the Police Tasks and Powers Act62 significantly upgraded the
     police restraining order. Police officers may impose such a measure on the offender not
     only on the scene of the offence, but also immediately after the offender has been
     apprehended, regardless of location. An offender who has repeatedly violated a restraining
     order may be detained by the Police and, at the same time, a fine may be imposed. For the
     cases when the place that the offender must not approach is an education institution
     attended by a victim who is a child or a minor, the legal basis was added to inform the
     relevant personnel at the education institutions of the duration of the restraining order or
     other information vital to the protection of the victim.


                                                                                                            15
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


           78.    With a view to raising public awareness, the Police publish on its web page, in
           several foreign languages, information on domestic violence and on police procedures.
           79.     Housing capacities for women victims of violence have increased. One of the safe
           houses has also been adapted for the needs of disabled persons. One crisis centre has been
           adapted for the needs of older people. The network of crisis centres and shelters expanded
           to regions in which such services were previously unavailable, and the housing capacities
           for victims of violence are currently provided for.
           80.   NGOs caution about the changed criminal offence of threat under Article 135 of the
           Criminal Code, which stipulates that the threatening of the security of another person
           without any consequences and when only one person is involved is liable to private
           prosecution63. This change was made particularly due to prosecutors' experience of a large
           number of withdrawn complaints of injured parties during the later stages of the procedure.
           The adequacy of this solution is being reviewed in 2014.
           81.    The available statistics show the improved effectiveness of justice in terms of
           prosecutions and conviction related to the offence of domestic violence under Article 191
           of the Criminal Code64.


      D.   Children's rights and violence against children (recommendations 4, 9,
           12, 13, 17, 24, 50–53, 75)

           82.    Regarding general executive measures, in 2006, on the basis of the recommendation
           of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Government adopted the Programme for
           Children and Youth 2006–2016. Since the basic document needed revising, the
           Government adopted the updated Programme for Children and Youth 2013–2016. The
           Child Observatory within the Social Protection Institute organised a single database on
           children and youth. In recent years, Slovenia has devoted particular attention to vulnerable
           groups of children. An important novelty in the prevention of child abuse is the passage of
           the FVPA and adoption of the Resolution on the 2009–2014 NPPFV65.
           83.     The amended Criminal Code specified criminal offences against sexual integrity of
           children in more detail, including Article 175 (Exploitation through Prostitution) and
           Article 176 (Presentation, Manufacture, Possession and Distribution of Pornographic
           Material). The sentence was elevated to a maximum of eight years, and intentional access
           to child pornography by computerised means was criminalised. The amendment introduced
           a new Article 173 a (criminal offence of soliciting persons under 15 years for sexual
           purposes), which incriminated grooming66.
           84.    Human rights education has already been introduced in the Slovenian school system
           and training programmes. Slovenia continues its efforts, also at the international level, by
           supporting the UN Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training, which was
           adopted by the UNGA, and by promoting and further implementing the World Program for
           Human Rights Education.
           85.     In 2011, as part of the e-Justice project and to implement draft Article 35 of the CoE
           Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse,
           the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) placed video conference equipment in 11 child-friendly
           interview rooms at social services.67 MoJ is preparing interdisciplinary training for experts
           on how to conduct interviews with children, including in the child-friendly interview
           rooms, by using video conference equipment.
           86.    Following expert consultations, which were organised by the Supreme Court in
           2008, the judiciary, on the basis of opinions of various experts and the experience of judges
           acquired when working with children involved in criminal proceedings, issued a


16
                                                                                        A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


     publication tailored to the needs of children of different age groups. To facilitate and
     prepare children to testify in criminal proceedings, the publication aims to explain to
     children in a friendly manner their role in the proceedings, as well as the importance and
     functioning of the court. The website of the courts has published the following brochures:
     "Jan and Jana Go to Court" for children aged 5–8 and "Going to Court as a Witness" for
     children aged 9–13.
     87.     According to the FVPA, children are a specially protected category covered by
     MLFSAEO, since all relevant authorities – when encountering violence against a child –
     must take immediate and effective action. The Act particularly stipulates that children are
     considered victims of violence even if the violence occurs against another family member
     in their presence. Nevertheless, the provision of the Family Code, which was rejected in a
     referendum on 25 March 2012, was wider, banning all forms of corporal punishment by
     parents, other persons, state authorities or providers of public services responsible for the
     care of children.68


E.   Freedom of religion and belief (recommendations 59, 60, 61, 62)

     88.    Slovenia guarantees freedom of religion and belief. According to the Criminal Code,
     public incitement to hatred, violence or intolerance based on religion is punishable by
     imprisonment up to two years. Incitement to religious hatred is also prohibited under the
     Religious Freedom Act. Freedom of construction and use of premises and buildings for
     religious purposes is provided for in the Religious Freedom Act. In 2013, the Islamic
     Religious Community laid the foundation stone for an Islamic cultural centre and mosque
     in Ljubljana.


F.   Persons transferred from the Register of Permanent Residents to the
     register of aliens after Slovenia’s independence (recommendations 77–
     83, 85–87)

     89.     In 2010, the NA passed the Act Amending the Act Regulating the Legal Status of
     Citizens of Former Yugoslavia Living in Slovenia69, which entered into force on 24 July
     2010 to implement the decision of the Constitutional Court of Slovenia No. U-I-246/02-28
     of 3 April 2003. The NA passed the amending Act with a view to finally regulating the
     legal status of persons erased from the Register of Permanent Residents. In addition to the
     implementation of the Constitutional Court Decision No. U-I-246/02-28 and the remedying
     of the non-compliance established therein (including by the regulation of the status with
     retroactive effect, i.e. since the erasure), the Act also regulates certain other, related,
     issues70. The content of the Act was also reviewed by the Constitutional Court. In its
     Decision No. U-II-1/10-19 of 10 June 201071, the Constitutional Court ruled on the
     unlawfulness of the required referendum, and also ruled that the amending Act remedies, in
     a constitutionally adequate manner, the non-compliance established in Constitutional Court
     Decision No. U-I-246/02-28, and that it legitimately regulates other issues72as they are
     closely connected with the remedying of the incompliances. The Court also assessed that
     the amending Act would provide the basis for finally regulating the legal status of citizens
     of other republics of the former SFRY erased from the Register of Permanent Residents,
     unless their status has already been regulated.
     90.    The amending Act also sets out the requirements to be met by a foreign national who
     was citizen of another republic of the former SFRY on 25 June 1991, and who has not yet
     obtained a permanent residence permit in Slovenia, to obtain the permit regardless of the
     provisions of the Aliens Act. The amending Act also lists cases in which it is deemed that
     citizens of other republics of the former SFRY who had been erased from the Register of


                                                                                                         17
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


           Permanent Residents had permanent residence permits and registered permanent residence
           also with retroactive effect, i.e. from the cessation of registration of permanent residence
           onwards (in respect of which they are issued with a special decision). According to the
           amending Act, a permanent residence permit may be obtained by persons erased from the
           Register of Permanent Residents who do not live in Slovenia due to justified absence.
           91.    As the regulation of the status of persons erased from the Register according to the
           amending Act and the effective management of administrative procedures also required that
           these persons be informed of the content of the amending Act, MoI presented the Act to
           those interested before its entry into force. Thereafter, the Ministry issued a special
           brochure in the Slovenian language which is available at all administrative units in Slovenia
           and at diplomatic missions and consular posts of Slovenia in the successor states of the
           former SFRY. It was also distributed to NGOs. In January 2012, MoI published the
           brochure in four additional languages of the successor states. The brochures and all relevant
           information are also available at the Ministry's website.
           92.    In addition to the amended Act regulating the status of persons erased from the
           Register of Permanent Residents in Slovenia and guaranteeing persons who left Slovenia
           the possibility of obtaining permanent residence permits, also with retroactive effect,
           Slovenia adopted a special compensation scheme in 2013, and an act providing for the
           redress of damages suffered by these persons. The Act on Compensations for Persons
           Erased from the Register of Permanent Residents (ARD), entered into force on December
           2013 and with effect from June 2014.
           93.     The Act provides for compensation for damages suffered by persons erased from the
           Register of Permanent Residents after Slovenia’s independence, remedies the violation of
           human rights and fundamental freedoms, and executes the judgement of the Grand
           Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) of 26 June 2012 passed in Kurić
           and others v. Slovenia. The Slovenian legal order systemically provides for just satisfaction,
           i.e. the compensation for damages suffered by persons erased from the Register of
           Permanent Residents.
           94.    The Act on Compensations stipulates that eligible persons may claim pecuniary
           compensation in an administrative procedure in which the pecuniary compensation will be
           set depending on the period of erasure since the date of erasure. For each completed month
           of erasure, a person is entitled to 50 euros compensation.
           95.   In addition to exercising the right to pecuniary compensation in an administrative
           procedure, the Act on Compensations offers eligible persons the option of claiming
           compensation in a judicial procedure in accordance with the general provisions of the Civil
           Code, with an additional three-year period for filing actions.
           96.    In addition to pecuniary compensation, the Act on Compensations provides for other
           forms of just satisfaction, providing or facilitating access to rights in various other areas
           regarding which it was deemed that such benefits could be useful or necessary. According
           to the Act on Compensations, eligible persons will be entitled to the payment of
           contributions for compulsory health insurance, to inclusive and priority consideration in
           social assistance programmes, to facilitation in exercising rights to public funds, to state
           scholarships, to equal treatment as Slovenian citizens in resolving housing problems, to
           access to the education system, and to participation or priority treatment in integration
           programmes.
           97.     The judgement of the Grand Chamber of the ECHR passed, on 12 March 2014 in
           Kurić and others v. Slovenia shows that the costs of compensation are subject to the
           discretion of the respondent state, and that, due to the exceptional circumstances of the
           case, the solution of awarding compensation on the basis of a lump sum appeared to be
           appropriate and that the state is free to select the method of implementing the judgement.


18
                                                                                       A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


G.   Rights of aliens and asylum seekers (recommendations 1, 4, 27, 96)

     98.    The Government is examining the possibilities of ratifying the International
     Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
     Families, whereby most of the rights in the Convention have already been included in the
     Slovenian legal system, and the scope and protection of migrant workers have been
     adequately regulated at the national level. Slovenia is a party to both international
     covenants on human rights, the ILO conventions C97 and C143 and the European Social
     Charter, which all contain a wide spectrum of protection of the rights of migrant workers.
     99.    During the reference period, Slovenia began intensively implementing integration
     measures with a view to developing a comprehensive and effective integration policy based
     on intercultural dialogue. Taking into account that integration is a dynamic and two-way
     process, Slovenia provides numerous programmes assisting immigrants in their integration
     into society and organises regular training for civil servants on intercultural competencies
     and an awareness-raising campaign for the majority population of the importance of
     accepting migration and on refugee issues. In recent years, the programmes have been made
     more accessible to foreign nationals.
     100. All proposed amendments to legislation governing international protection are
     submitted to the UNHCR for preliminary observations and remarks. These remarks should
     be taken into account as far as possible. Both the UNHCR and NGOs engaged in
     international protection have been actively involved in implementing the provisions of the
     International Protection Act.


H.   Trafficking in human beings (recommendations 11, 16, 39–50)

     101. With the reform of the Inter-ministerial Working Group on the Fight against THB in
     2012, the National Coordinator on the issue of THB was tasked with reporting before the
     relevant commission of the NA.
     102. In the period between 2011 and 2013, the law enforcement authorities recorded and
     dealt with several forms of THB73. Most of the cases were identified as a form of exploiting
     prostitution and other sexual abuse of victims of trafficking. Instances of forced labour
     were also considered, such as forced begging and forced commission of crimes (e.g.
     theft)74.
     103. Providing assistance and protecting trafficking victims is carried out on the basis of
     legally provided public tenders for programmes of assistance published by the MoI and
     MLFSAEO, and implemented by the NGOs selected in the tendering procedure. Engaging
     NGOs was also the main focus of the National Coordinator. As a result, another NGO was
     included in the new intergovernmental working group in 2012.
     104. Since 2010, trafficking was prevented through a number of events and awareness-
     raising projects among the general public, including target risk groups. The general public
     was informed of the different forms of media reporting; the topics and events were also
     accessible at a government web site set up for this purpose. The target risk groups
     (adolescents and migrant workers) were informed about the risks of trafficking through
     various government projects. The prevention also includes training for professionals
     encountering this issue in their work. In October 2010, the MoJ published a translation of
     the leading judgement of the ECHR on THB75, which is included in training material for
     judges. Police officers participated in training programmes to uncover such trafficking. The
     Slovenian Police took part in the drafting of a manual of the FRONTEX Agency to identify
     potential trafficking victims. Regular training is provided for the staff of education
     institutions, diplomatic missions and consular posts, and social workers.


                                                                                                        19
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1


             105. Child victims of trafficking are a special category in the fight against THB, to which
             Slovenia devotes adequate legal and other attention. Fight against trafficking in children,
             child prostitution and child pornography forms part of the biannual joint Government action
             plan for the fight against THB.
             106. The 2013 manual of the FRONTEX Agency containing indicators of potential
             trafficking victims was drafted to serve as a tool for border police officers to identify
             potential perpetrators or victims quickly and effectively and is available in electronic form
             on the Police web site, which makes it accessible to all police officers in Slovenia.

Notes

         1
            Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia (hereinafter Ur.l.RS) No. 91/2011.
         2
            Most of the provisions of Directive 2011/36/EU have been transposed into national legislation.
          3
            Amendments were made to articles 90, 97 and 99 of the Constitution.
          4
            National Reform Programme presents the country's policies and measures to sustain growth and jobs
            and to reach the targets of the EU strategy Europe 2020.
          5
            In 2012, the EU-28 average was 34.4%.
          6
            The average for EU-28 was 30.6%.
          7
            Ur.l.RS Nos. 62/2010, 40/2011, 40/2012, 57/2012, 14/2013.
          8
            Ur.l.RS Nos. 61/2010, 40/2011, 110/2011, 40/2012, 14/2013.
          9
            Ur.l.RS No. 99/2013.
         10
            Ur.l.RS No. 99/2013.
         11
            Ur.l.RS No. 58/2011.
         12
            Ur.l.RS No. 90/2013.
         13
            Ur.l.RS No. 90/2013.
         14
            Ur.l.RS No. 41/2011.
         15
            Ur.l.RS No. 60/2010.
         16
            Ur.l.RS No. 21/2013.
         17
            The necessary measures are envisaged in the draft law on student work which is currently being
            considered by the Government. MLFSAEO expects to limit student work through the above and other
            measures, such as tax relief for employers who hire unemployed persons and benefit refunds upon the
            employment of young unemployed, resulting in an increased number of employment contracts.
         18
            Ur.l.RS No. 14/13.
         19
            Ur.l.RS No. 40/12.
         20
            Ur.l.RS No. 91/13.
         21
            In 2010, 782 beneficiaries received a housing subsidy, in 2011, 816 beneficiaries, and in 2012 as
            many as 1,406, which is partly due to the fact that municipalities cannot provide enough low-cost
            housing.
         22
            As part of the austerity measures, the national housing savings scheme was abolished in 2012, since
            its original purpose had not been fulfilled.
         23
            Chapter 2.4 in Part III of the report includes a detailed description of the issue.
         24
            Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia No. 50/10.
         25
            Chapter 6 in Part III of the report includes a detailed description of the issue.
         26
            Ur.l.RS No. 99/13
         27
            Ur.l.RS Nos. 11/11, 98/11, 83/12, 111/13 and 114/13.
         28
            Ur.l.RS Nos. 50/11 and 57/11.
         29
            Ur.l.RS No. 26/2014.
         30
            Ur.l.RS No. 87/11.
         31
            Ur.l.RS No. 45/2010.
         32
            Ur.l.RS Nos. 14/2007, 46/2010, 40/2012, and 100/2013.
         33
            Earlier requirement was 100 members with 10 years of previous activities.
         34
            From 2009 and 2010, respectively, certain important categories of cases are designated as constituting
            court backlog earlier than hitherto. Accordingly, before the adoption of the new methodology, certain
            cases that were considered as constituting court backlogs if they had been in the judicial system for 18
            months, are now considered as such if more than 6 months have passed since they were received, and



20
                                                                                                A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1



   sometimes even in cases when they are older than three months.
35
   Ur.l.RS No. 96/2009.
36
   Formerly 55 first-instance district and local courts.
37
   The most important being the Department for the Investigation and Prosecution of Officials with
   Special Authorisations within the Specialised State Prosecutor's Office.
38
   Ur.l.RS No. 110/2006.
39
   Ur.l.RS No. 70/2006.
40
   Instead of current 35%.
41
   It was intended to give female students an opportunity to familiarise themselves with politics,
   political life and active participation.
42
   Ur.l.RS Nos. 36/2009 and 21/2013.
43
   ILO Convention 89.
44
   Ur.l.RS No. 94/2010.
45
   Among others, new measures include the right to assistive devices to overcome communication
   obstacles, right to reimbursement of costs of vehicle alteration, and financing of a call centre for the
   deaf.
46
   Ur.l.RS No. 87/2011.
47
   Vocational rehabilitation, system of quotas, employment incentives, etc.
48
   It is a follow-up to the 2006 Action Programme for Persons with Disabilities 2007–2013.
49
   The main objectives include: awareness raising and information, housing and inclusion, accessibility,
   education, work and employment, financial and social security, health and health care, cultural
   expression, sports and leisure activities, religious and spiritual life, organisations of persons with
   disabilities, violence and discrimination, and aging with disability.
50
   Ur.l.RS No. 33/2007.
51
   Local Self-Government Act, Local Elections Act, Voting Rights Register Act, Organization and
   Financing of Education Act, Elementary School Act, Pre-school Education Act, Media Act, Act
   Implementing the Public Interest in the Field of Culture, Librarianship Act, Promotion of Balanced
   Regional Development Act, Radiotelevizija Slovenija Act, Financing of Municipalities Act, Cultural
   Heritage Protection Act, Criminal Code of the Republic of Slovenia, Public Interest in Youth Sector
   Act, Slovenian Press Agency Act.
52
   They concern housing, education, employment, health care, preserving and developing different
   varieties of Romani, culture, informational and publishing activities, awareness raising, and
   combating discrimination.
53
   On the basis of national conferences on the reduction of inequality in the health of the Roma
   population, and the health of Roma women and children; programmes to promote health among
   Roma; activities aimed at improving the rate of immunisation and earlier recourse to medical
   assistance and respecting the instructions of health-care workers, and workshops focusing on health in
   Roma settlements.
54
   See examples of good practices.
55
   In 2012, 18 projects in 16 municipalities were co-financed. In 2013, 18 projects in 11 municipalities
   were co-financed.
56
   In future, programmes to equip Roma settlements with basic public utility infrastructure will be
   drafted at municipal level and will include all the needs of Roma settlements, together with financial
   evaluation and overall assessment. Municipalities will integrate their programmes in regional
   development programmes, which will be in accordance with Slovenia’s development strategy and
   will specify the time-frame and financial evaluation, and a system for monitoring, assessing and
   organising implementation.
57
   Expert assistance and consultations for all providers engaged in minority issues, the open-door day
   organised by the heads of departments for all artists engaging in minority issues, etc.
58
   Mediation, legal advice on awareness-raising, etc.
59
   Ur.l.RS No. 7/2011.
60
   Ur.l.RS No. 16/2008.
61
   MLFSAEO, the Police, social services, educational institutions, multidisciplinary teams, and regional
   services, etc.
62
   Ur.l.RS No. 15/2013.
63
   This means that the State Prosecutor does not prosecute ex officio.



                                                                                                                 21
A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1



         64
            In 2009, 89 adult offenders were convicted, in 2010 186 offenders, in 2011 207 offenders and in 2012
            265 offenders; the number of convicted minor offenders also increased – in 2009, there were 2, in
            2010 there were 6; in 2011 there were 9, and in 2012 there were 13 such offenders.
         65
            Ur.l.RS No. 41/2009.
         66
            I.e. when the offender arranges, through communication technologies, to meet with the future victim
            with a view to committing an illegal sexual offence.
         67
            The project is presented in more detail under the section on good practices.
         68
            More information on the Family Code is included in the chapter 2.2 Same-sex partnerships.
         69
            Ur.l.RS No. 50/2010.
         70
            Regulating the status of children of persons erased from the Register and regulating the status with
            retroactive effect for those citizens of Slovenia who were citizens of other republics of the former
            SFRY when Slovenia gained independence, and who were erased from the Register of Permanent
            Residents, and subsequently admitted to Slovenian citizenship without having received a permanent
            residence permit.
         71
            Ur.l.RS No. 50/2010.
         72
            The status of children of persons erased from the Register and the status with retroactive effect for
            citizens of Slovenia.
         73
            In 2011, there were fifteen criminal proceedings (13 for the offence of trafficking), in 2012 twenty-
            seven (12 for the offence of trafficking), in 2013 fifteen (all for the offence of trafficking).
         74
            In 2011, there were six, in 2012 eight, in 2013 only two.
         75
            Rantsev v. Cyprus and the Russian Federation (2009).
                                             ____________________




22
