UNITED
NATIONS                                                                                                 A
                          General Assembly                                       Distr.
                                                                                 GENERAL

                                                                                 A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                                 3 November 2009


                                                                                 Original: ENGLISH


HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
Seventh session
Geneva, 8-19 February 2010




    NATIONAL REPORT SUBMITTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH 15 (A)
         OF THE ANNEX TO HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL RESOLUTION 5/1*

                                                       Slovenia




*
    The present document was not edited before being sent to the United Nations translation services.


GE.09-16919
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 2



                                 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

 1.   CEPOL       European Police College
 2.   CoE         Council of Europe
 3.   ESD         Education for Sustainable Development
 4.   EU          European Union
 5.   HIV         Human immunodeficiency virus
 6.   ILO         International Labour Organization
 7.   NGOs        Non-governmental organisations
 8.   RS          Republic of Slovenia
 9.   SFRY        Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
10.   Ur. l. RS   Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia
                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                         Page 3


                         I. REPORT DRAFTING METHODOLOGY

1.    The Republic of Slovenia (hereinafter Slovenia) launched the preparations for the first
Universal Periodic Review in the beginning of 2009. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Human
Rights Section, was tasked with the coordination of drafting the national report; the preparations
also involved the Interministerial Commission on Human Rights1, relevant ministries and
government offices. Non-governmental organisations were informed of the drafting of the report
in March, and they had the possibility to provide comments on the draft in June. The draft report
was submitted for consideration to the Human Rights Ombudsman of the Republic of Slovenia
in August 2009, and was dealt with by the Interministerial Commission on Human Rights in
September.

                 II. NORMATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

                         A. Organisation of the state and the judiciary

2.    Slovenia is a parliamentary democratic republic, consistent with the principle of the
separation of legislative, executive and judicial powers. The legislative power is exercised by
the bicameral parliament (National Assembly, National Council), the executive power by the
Government and the judicial power by the judiciary. The Republic of Slovenia is represented by
the President of the Republic, who is also the commander-in-chief of the Slovenian defence
forces. The administrative division of the state comprises 210 municipalities.

3.    The judiciary is independent and separated from the executive and legislative powers. It is
bound by the Constitution and laws. The office of a judge is permanent. Judges are elected by the
National Assembly on the proposal of the expert and independent Judicial Council. Judges are
independent in the performance of the judicial function. The Constitutional Court is the highest
judicial body protecting the constitutionality, legality and human rights.

                 B. Constitutional and statutory provisions on human rights

4.    A third of provisions of the Slovenian Constitution2 (hereinafter the Constitution) is
focused on human rights and fundamental freedoms, which may be implemented directly on the
basis of the Constitution. In order to effectively provide for and implement human rights, the
general principle of equality and specific constitutional provisions are defined in greater detail in
individual laws, particularly the Human Rights Ombudsman Act3, Implementation of the
Principle of Equal Treatment Act4, Equal Opportunities for Women and Men Act5, Family
Violence Act6, and Personal Data Protection Act7. Human rights are also guaranteed by or
implemented through certain statutory provisions in different areas of legal regulation,
particularly in criminal and procedural legislation, labour legislation and electoral legislation, in
laws guaranteeing the protection of human rights of individuals with particular needs or of
members of vulnerable social groups, as well as in a number of other laws. Motivated by the
guaranteeing of true equality, the Constitution, the general act prohibiting discrimination and the
special act on gender equality explicitly define the basis for implementing special measures or
positive differentiation in cases when deviations from the equal treatment principle are justified
by the lawful ends and when the means to attain this goal are both adequate and necessary.
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 4

                                  C. Human rights institutions

5.    As regards human rights, the relevant authorities in Slovenia include judicial bodies, state
administration bodies and other bearers of public authority. In addition to ordinary and
extraordinary legal remedies available to an individual at the national level in cases of violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the European Court of Human Rights guarantees the
control over the implementation of the European Convention on Human Rights at the regional
level. In cases of violations of the rights under the Convention, Slovenian citizens also have
access to this Court. Institutions specialized in the protection and promotion of human rights
include: Human Rights Ombudsman, Office for Equal Opportunities, Advocate of the Principle
of Equality, coordinators for equal opportunities for women and men, Office for Religious
Communities, Office for Nationalities, as well as many working bodies established by the
Government or operating within ministries.

6.     The establishment of the office of the ombudsman for the rights of citizens is provided for
in the Constitution in order to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms in relation to state
bodies, local self-governing bodies, and bearers of public authority. The Ombudsman has the
authority to obtain from state and other bodies that he/she can monitor all data regardless of the
level of classification to perform investigations; within this framework, the Ombudsman can also
call witnesses for questioning. The Ombudsman may at any time inspect any state body or
institution that restricts personal freedom, such as psychiatric institutions. The Ombudsman does
not have the authority to monitor the work of judges and courts except in cases of unjustified
delay of procedures or clear abuse of power. In compliance with the Constitutional Court Act8,
the Ombudsman may file a constitutional complaint by consent of the injured party and a request
for a constitutional review of regulations if he/she believes that a regulation inadmissibly
encroaches on fundamental human rights and freedoms.

7.    The Office for Equal Opportunities is striving for true equality of women and men in all
spheres of life. The Advocate of the Principle of Equality, who operates within the Office, is
responsible for dealing with initiatives on alleged violations of the prohibition of discrimination
on the grounds of all personal circumstances. Coordinators for equal opportunities for women and
men appointed by all ministries, and also set up in certain municipalities, closely cooperate with
the Office. The Office for Religious Communities monitors the position of religious
communities and keeps the register of religious communities.9 The Office for Nationalities
monitors the implementation of constitutional and statutory provisions relating to the special
rights of members of the Italian and Hungarian national communities, and monitors and ensures
the protection of the special rights of the Roma community living in Slovenia, unless these fall
within the competence of other state or local community bodies.

                                  D. International obligations

8.    Article 8 of the Constitution stipulates that laws and regulations must comply with
generally accepted principles of international law and with treaties that are binding on Slovenia.
Ratified and published treaties shall be applied directly. Slovenia respects the objectives and
principles of the UN Charter, Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international
obligations assumed with succession or conclusion of major international universal and regional
instruments in the field of human rights. Within the adopted international contractual obligations
for the protection of human rights, Slovenia is subject to control by relevant bodies established
                                                                           A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                           Page 5

under the treaties, to which it reports regularly on the status of human rights, conducts open
dialogue and implements their recommendations in good faith. As a member of the Council of
Europe and the European Union, Slovenia is also bound by the adopted conventions of the
Council of Europe, the EU acquis and the practice of the European Court of Human Rights and
the Court of Justice of the European Communities.

9.   By ratifying the Third Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions, the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol and by signing
the United Nations Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
Slovenia fulfilled the obligations as assumed upon announcing its candidature for the
membership of the Human Rights Council. Slovenia extended an open invitation to all bodies
mandated for special procedures. Slovenia was among the first countries to sign the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in September
2009 and ratified the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human
Beings. Moreover ratification of Protocol No. 12 to the Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has been included in the government programme.

10. At the international level, Slovenia is a supporter of progressive human rights policy by
advocating the development of new standards and by applying and implementing the existing
international human rights standards.

    III. PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS POLITICAL AND
                            CIVIL RIGHTS

 A. State governed by the rule of law: implementing Constitutional Court decisions, court
                           backlogs, trial without undue delay

11. The Constitution is the highest legal act of every state, and the Constitutional Court
decisions the highest authority for clarifying the provisions contained in the Constitution, which
must be respected and implemented by all state bodies and all natural persons and legal entities.
At the end of 2008, nine decisions of the Constitutional Court on the review of constitutionality
of laws were not implemented. Some of these decisions are being implemented now.

12. Article 23 of the Constitution stipulates that everyone has the right to have any decision
regarding his rights, duties and any charges brought against him made without undue delay by an
independent, impartial court constituted by law. The latest judgment of the European Court of
Human Rights in the case of Lukenda v. Slovenia10 as well as the decision of the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Slovenia No. U-I-65/05 (2005) obligates the state to establish the
conditions in which the right to trial without undue delay shall be provided. For this purpose, the
Ministry of Justice drafted the “Lukenda Project” in 2005, which envisages the elimination of
court backlogs in courts and prosecutor’s offices by 31 December 2010. The measures include
the provision of workplace conditions, additional provision and organisation of human resources,
reorganisation and better management of courts, a stimulating remuneration of the court staff,
additional training of judges and prosecutors, and accelerated informatisation of courts (»e-
justice« project). The adoption of the Act Regulating the Protection of Right to Trial without
Undue Delay11 brings significant progress, in respect of which the European Court of Human
Rights ruled in 2007 that it contains effective legal remedies for the protection of the right to trial
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 6

without undue delay in compliance with Article 6, paragraph 1, with reference to Article 13 of
the European Convention on Human Rights12.

13. As at 31 December 2008, court backlogs in courts of general jurisdiction of first and
second instance totalled 274,071 cases.

           Table 1
           Court backlogs in courts of general jurisdiction of first and second instance

Courts              31 Dec     31 Dec     31 Dec     31 Dec     31 Dec      31 Dec     Reduction rate
                      2000       2004       2005       2006       2007        2008       (2004-2008)
Higher               5.139      6.242      4.744      3.032      1.898         667    -89,3 (per cent)
District            22.439     13.924     14.204     12.606     12.037      10.748    -22,8 (per cent)
Local              196.866    290.156    285.953    276.303    273.240     262.656     -9,5 (per cent)
 Total             224.444    310.322    304.901    291.941    287.175     274.071    -11,7 (per cent)



                                   B. Prohibition of discrimination

14. Article 14 of the Constitution stipulates that everyone shall be guaranteed equal human
rights and fundamental freedoms irrespective of national origin, race, sex, language, religion,
political or other conviction, material standing, birth, education, social status, disability or any
other personal circumstance. Article 14, paragraph 2, stipulates that all are equal before the law.
Equal protection of rights regulated in Article 22 also falls within the scope of the general
principle of equality (equal protection of rights in any proceeding before a court and before other
state bodies).Gender equality is also provided by certain laws such as the Implementation of the
Principle of Equal Treatment Act, including individual provisions of different laws (e.g. the
provision of the Penal Code13 incriminating the violation of equality as a criminal offence; the
provision of the Employment Relationship Act14 prohibiting discrimination; provisions of
procedural laws guaranteeing the equality of parties to criminal, civil, administrative and tax
procedures).

15. The constitutional principle of equality is specified by the provisions of laws regulating
employment and work, education, social protection, electoral law, etc. The application of the
principle of equality is defined in greater detail by the Implementation of the Principle of Equal
Treatment Act, which provides for equal treatment regardless of different personal
circumstances. The Act prohibits direct and indirect discrimination, instructions that might result
in discrimination, retaliatory measures, and harassment. It also contains the legal basis for the
introduction of temporary special measures aimed at ensuring the true equality of persons that
are in a less favourable situation due to one or more personal circumstances. The cases of alleged
violations of the prohibition of discrimination are dealt with by the Advocate of the Principle of
Equality. Everyone who thinks they are being discriminated against may contact the Advocate
either in writing or orally. The Advocate provides explanations whether a specific act or
omission thereof would constitute a violation of the principle of equality on the grounds of
personal circumstances. He/she provides assistance to those interested with regard to the
application of the right to equal treatment also in other procedures. In case an alleged offender
fails to respond to the request for explanation, fails to carry out the Advocate’s recommendations
                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                         Page 7

or fails to notify the Advocate on time on measures adopted, the Advocate refers the case to the
relevant inspection service.

16. Alleged victims may also contact relevant inspection services and other administrative
bodies and judicial bodies for the protection against discrimination; they can also exercise their
right to damages. In case there is suspicion in respect of violations, the burden of proof lies on
the offender.

17. In Slovenia, gender equality is a right, a goal and a horizontal principle permeating all
spheres of life of women and men in all life periods. The Equal Opportunities for Women and
Men Act provided for the fundamentals in improving the situation of women and creating equal
opportunities for women and men by removing obstacles to establishing gender equality, by
preventing and eliminating unequal treatment of persons on the basis of their gender as a form of
discrimination and by creating the conditions for establishing equal representation of women and
men in all spheres of social life. The Act envisages measures and strategies to enhance the role
and situation of women and guarantee gender equality; Slovenia is bound by treaties and
political commitments to meet these objectives. The year 2005 saw the adoption of the National
Programme for Equal Opportunities for Women and Men 2005–2013, which is being
implemented by ministries and government offices through two-year periodic plans; on the basis
of a reporting system, the government regularly examines the adequacy and effectiveness of
activities performed and, if required, changes, adapts or upgrades them. Every two years, the
government reports to the National Assembly on the implementation of the National Programme.

18. The Office for Equal Opportunities is the Government’s central mechanism for dealing
with gender equality. Its competences and tasks are in compliance with the established
international standards regulating national mechanisms for the strengthening of the role and
situation of women and guaranteeing gender equality. The Office plays a significant role in the
promotion of an effective use of specialized policies and measures for gender equality and for
integrating gender equality into all public policies. The Office carries out its work in cooperation
with the National Assembly Commission for Petitions, Human Rights and Equal Opportunities.

19. Notable progress in the government policy for the strengthening of the role and the
situation of women and guaranteeing gender equality was achieved in education, employment,
equal pay for equal work, violence against women and trafficking in women and girls. The
progress was facilitated by the new legislation, the national programme and action plans for
equal opportunities for women and men as well as by the implementation of specialized action
plans and programmes: action plans on the fight against trafficking in human beings, 2009-2014
National Programme on Prevention of Family Violence; providing regular information for
women and relevant stakeholders; systematic awareness-raising of the public and target groups;
education, training and cooperation with non-governmental organizations, trade unions, research
and educational institutions; encouraging media to assume positive role in ensuring gender
equality and the inclusion of men in endeavours towards gender equality.

                                       1. Same-sex partnership

20. Decision U-I-425/06-10 of July 2009 of the Constitutional Court established the
inconsistency of Article 22 of the Registration of a Same-Sex Civil Partnership Act15 regulating
inheritance with Article 14, paragraph 1, of the Constitution. The Court establishes that the
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 8

position of partners in registered same-sex partnerships is in its essential factual and legal aspects
comparable with the position of spouses as regards the right to inheritance from a deceased
partner. The differences in the regulation of inheritance between spouses and between partners in
registered same-sex partnerships are therefore not based on any objective, non-personal
circumstance, but on sexual orientation. Until the established inconsistency is remedied, the
same rules apply for inheritance between partners in registered same-sex partnerships as apply
for inheritance between spouses in accordance with the Inheritance Act.16 The National
Assembly is obliged to remedy the established inconsistency within six months from the
publication of this decision17.

21. In its endeavours to eliminate stigmatization and discrimination against HIV-positive
people, the Ministry of Health is co-financing NGOs fighting stigma and providing counselling
and training in this area.

                                       2. Children’s rights

22. The first Programme for Children and Youth 2006-2016 was drafted in 2006 in
compliance with the recommendation of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child. The
Programme includes all important areas of the life of children, particularly those where
unresolved or new problems are perceived, with which children and youth are faced in the
modern society. It also includes complementary qualitative and quantitative objectives, as well
as development guidelines and activities essential to the implementation of the goals set.
Individual chapters touch upon normative, administrative-systemic and programme levels as well
as upon specific implementation of children’s rights in practice. A priority task was
concentrating on guidelines and activities introducing changes, amendments or new solutions
within the established activities implemented by national or other services in the field of child
care. The Programme for Children and Youth will be implemented in compliance with funds
earmarked for the financial realisation for each activity or task. The Government will devote
particular attention to improving the situation of children. A special action plan on the
Programme for Children and Youth 2006-2016 will be adopted for this purpose.

23. A pilot project “Child Advocate – Voice of the Child” was launched in 2006. The project
is aimed at elaborating a model programme of the child advocate; its substantive and
organisational basis would allow for its inclusion in the formal system and thus ensure its
implementation at the national level. In compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the model would enable children to actively participate in decision-making processes.

24. A new Family Code that is currently under public debate regulates comprehensively the
entire family law, strengthening the influence of the state on relations within the family for the
child’s benefit. The novelties include the prohibition of corporal punishment of children, the
system of children’s advocacy, the extension of the definition of “family protected under the
constitution” (with a view to enhancing the protection of children) and introduction of equal
status to same-sex partnerships and heterosexual partnerships.

                              3. Rights of persons with disabilities

25. To ensure the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons with
disabilities on an equal footing, a number of regulations in the field of education, employment,
                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                         Page 9

health care, removing communication obstacles and environmental barriers, self-organizing of
persons with disabilities and providing financial assistance for their personal needs was adopted.
Major programmes, regulations and measures adopted in recent years include:

           Government Action Programme for Persons with Disabilities 2007–2013: based on
            the principles of ensuring equal opportunities, prohibiting discrimination on the basis
            of disability and ensure accessibility as a precondition for the implementation of
            rights and social inclusion of persons with disabilities. The Programme includes
            twelve basic goals with specific implementing measures. Relevant ministries are
            obliged to report to the Government every year on the implementation. One of the
            key objectives of the Programme is indiscriminatory provision of access to work and
            employment for persons with disabilities in an open, inclusive and accessible work
            environment;

           The Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment of Disabled Persons Act18 regulates
            the right to rehabilitation, supported employment, incentives for employment in the
            open labour market, employment in sheltered workshops and job centres, quota
            system, etc. The Act significantly improved the situation of persons with disabilities
            in the labour market. Gaming proceeds were earmarked for the work of
            organisations specialising in disability issues and humanitarian organisations;

           Certain rights of persons with disabilities have been included in a number of
            regulations applicable to health care, disability insurance, parental benefit, education
            and training and taxation;

           In April 2008, Slovenia ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
            Disabilities and its Optional Protocol;

           During its Presidency of the EU Council, Slovenia drafted the Resolution on the
            Situation of Persons with Disabilities in the European Union and organised a
            presidential conference with an informal ministerial meeting on the implementation
            of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the Member States;

           Organisations specialising in disability issues play a significant role in the
            development of disability policy in Slovenia.

            C. Protection of the rights of national and other ethnic communities

26. The national territory of the Republic of Slovenia is traditionally and historically also
settled by (autochthonous) Italian and Hungarian national communities and the Roma ethnic
community. The situation and special rights of the Italian and Hungarian national
communities are defined in Articles 64 and 11 of the Constitution and guaranteed regardless of
the number of members of these communities. The organisation and fundamental rights of the
two national communities are specified in the Self-Governing Ethnic Communities Act19, and
their situation is also defined by approx. 90 laws and other regulations, ordinances and statutes of
municipalities in ethnically mixed areas and by bilateral and multilateral treaties. All regulations
requiring the implementation of rights and the situation of the Italian and Hungarian national
communities are adopted in consensus with their representatives. The two national communities
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 10

are directly represented in representative bodies of local self-government and in the Slovenian
National Assembly, with one representative, respectively.

27. The national territory of the Republic of Slovenia is traditionally and historically also
settled by (autochthonous) Italian and Hungarian national communities and the Roma ethnic
community. The situation and special rights of the Italian and Hungarian national
communities are defined in Articles 64 and 11 of the Constitution and guaranteed regardless of
the number of members of these communities. The organisation and fundamental rights of the
two national communities are specified in the Self-Governing Ethnic Communities Act20, and
their situation is also defined by approx. 90 laws and other regulations, ordinances and statutes of
municipalities in ethnically mixed areas and by bilateral and multilateral treaties. All regulations
requiring the implementation of rights and the situation of the Italian and Hungarian national
communities are adopted in consensus with their representatives. The two national communities
are directly represented in representative bodies of local self-government and in the Slovenian
National Assembly, with one representative, respectively.

28. The situation and rights of members of the Roma community are regulated by Article 65
of the Constitution, the Roma Community Act21 and certain provisions of 14 other laws. The
situation of the Roma community is regulated comprehensively by a special act, which stipulates
that state bodies and self-governing local community bodies must ensure the implementation of
the special rights of the Roma community; it regulates the organization of the Roma community
at the national and local levels, including financing. A national programme of measures is being
drafted for the operationalization of the act, which will be implemented through sector specific
programmes and measures by relevant state bodies and self-governing local community bodies;
the implementation of the programme will be monitored by the Government Commission for the
Protection of the Roma Ethnic Community. All ministries and government offices must devote
special concern to Roma issues within their competence and include them in national
programmes in their fields of work. The 1995 Programme of Measures for Assisting the Roma is
still being implemented and includes measures for improving the status of the Roma community
in key areas such as housing, education, employment, family welfare, social and health care,
cultural development of the Roma community, as well as providing information to Roma and
their organisation. In Slovenia, acts relating to the Roma community are being adopted after
consulting with the community. On the basis of the statute, the Roma community is represented
in municipal councils of 19 local communities.

29. The Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia does not contain any provisions relating
directly to the special protection of members of other ethnic groups. These communities can
exercise their rights in accordance with Article 14 (Equality before the Law), Article 61
(Expression of National Affiliation) and Article 62 (Right to Use One’s Language and Script) of
the Constitution.

             1. Education of members of national and other ethnic communities

30. Slovenia has developed two different models of education for members of the Italian
and Hungarian national communities, which share the same objectives – bilingualism and co-
existence of the two nations and cultures. For the implementation of rights of members of the
Italian national community in the field of pre-school, elementary, general secondary and
secondary vocational education, in accordance with the legislation, in the areas defined as
                                                                        A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                        Page 11

ethnically mixed, pre-school institutions and schools with Italian as the language of instruction
are established. The Slovenian language is a compulsory subject in these schools. In educational
institutions in ethnically mixed areas providing education in the Slovenian language, the
learning of the language of a national community is compulsory. In ethnically mixed areas
where members of the Hungarian national community reside, education is provided
bilingually, in the Slovenian and Hungarian languages. These pre-school institutions and schools
are attended by children of Slovenian and Hungarian nationalities. This enables pupils to learn a
second language in addition to their mother tongue and become familiar with the culture of the
other nation. Educational activities are carried out in both languages. When learning the mother
tongue and the second language, pupils are divided into groups, which enable them to learn their
mother tongue at an advanced level.

31. The Strategy of Education of Roma in the Republic of Slovenia (2004) includes a number
of measures: inclusion of Roma children in pre-school institutions at least two years prior to their
enrolment in elementary school; inclusion of a Roma assistant in the work of educational
institutions as a bridge between the pre-school institution or school on the one hand and the
Roma community on the other; introduction of the Romani language as an optional subject;
teaching the Slovenian language; introduction of content taken from Roma culture, history and
identity into lessons; prohibition of homogenous classes (segregation) of Roma children;
introduction of individualisation, internal and flexible differentiation and different forms of
learning assistance; building confidence in school and the elimination of prejudices; further
education and training of educational professionals. The Union of Roma of Slovenia was
involved throughout the drafting of the document and its president is the president of the
working group which drafts annual action plans for the implementation of the strategy. The
strategy is aimed at training Roma to contribute themselves to effective integration of the Roma
population into various forms of education. The following activities have already been carried
out in the area of education: a network of schools with Roma pupils has been formed within
which teachers exchange experience and good practices, and additional teacher training is
provided; schools implemented projects and other activities of intercultural dialogue; the
standardisation of the Romani language was carried out as a basis for its teaching; occupational
standards for Roma assistants were developed; a project to develop the method (and materials)
for teaching Slovenian as a foreign language is being implemented; the syllabus for a course in
Roma culture was drafted and adopted; programmes for vocational training of educational
professionals are being implemented for successful work with the Roma pupils; Roma assistants
are being trained; the Ministry of Education and Sport has been co-financing education of adult
Roma; the project introducing and educating Roma assistants is being implemented with the
support of the European Social Fund; young Roma intellectuals endeavour for the awareness
raising of members of the Roma community about the significance of knowledge and education
through the Roma Academic Club.

               2. Cultural rights of the national and other ethnic communities

32. In cooperation with the members of the Italian and Hungarian national communities, the
Roma community and other ethnic communities, the Ministry of Culture identifies their needs
for the protection of cultural specificities and develops measures aimed at their quality
integration. The Ministry endeavours for the preservation of cultural rights of these communities
through financial measures (financing projects), organisational measures (expert assistance,
counselling, workshops, mediation in resolving interethnic tensions) and normative measures
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 12

(special provisions included in the general cultural act; active participation of these communities
in shaping the regulations).

                                       3. Domestic violence

33. In March 2008, the Family Violence Prevention Act entered into force which defines
physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence and disregard to provide due care to
family members. Children, elderly and disabled persons enjoy special protection against
violence. If the victim of violence is a child, anyone is obliged to inform a social work centre, the
police or the state prosecutor’s office accordingly. Another novelty lies in the possibility for the
victim to choose an assistant who accompanies him/her in all proceedings related to family
violence and can help in settling problems. In addition, the victim has the right to a legal
representative who defends his/her interest in the proceedings. A multidisciplinary team lead by
the social work centre draws up an aid plan for a victim in collaboration with other authorities.
The Act stipulates free legal assistance to the victims of violence in court proceedings. The court
can impose certain restrictions in case of acts of violence, prohibiting to the perpetrator the
following: entering to the accommodation premises where the victim lives; coming at a specified
distance within the proximity of the accommodation where the victim lives; coming near the
places that the victim regularly frequents; establishing contact with the victim in any way. On the
victim’s request, the court can require the perpetrator to transfer the common residence into
exclusive use by the victim. In case of a divorce, the spouse victim can demand that the other
spouse (the perpetrator of violence against the victim or his/her children) leave him/her in
exclusive use of the accommodation in which both of them live. In order to protect the children,
the court assigns the residence to the spouse with whom the children live. All the above
restrictions and measures apply for a maximum of six months with the ability of extension for
additional six months. Based on this Act, all competent authorities (the police, education, health
and social institutions) should adopt their own rules for acting in the event of domestic
violence.22

34. The new Penal Code sanctions, in a separate article, domestic violence that may be
committed as various acts or practices against the person with whom the perpetrator lives or has
lived in a family or other permanent community. In the previous Penal Code, the forms and
consequences of domestic violence were defined in different articles.

35. The National Assembly adopted the Resolution on the National Programme of Family
Violence Prevention for the Period 2009-2014. It is a strategic document defining the objectives,
measures and key players with regard to reduction and prevention of family violence. Specific
tasks and activities will be defined in two-year action plans.

        D. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

36. Slovenia ratified the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 1993. Upon ratification it made a declaration based on
Articles 21 and 22 of the Convention.

37. The Constitution stipulates as follows: human life is inviolable and there is no capital
punishment in Slovenia (Article 17); no one may be subjected to torture or to inhuman or
degrading punishment or treatment (Article 18); respect for human personality and dignity shall
                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                         Page 13

be guaranteed in criminal and in all other legal proceedings, as well as during the deprivation of
liberty and enforcement of punitive sanctions (Article 21, paragraph 1); and violence of any form
against any person whose liberty has been restricted in any way is prohibited, as is the use of any
form of coercion in obtaining confessions and statements (Article 21, paragraph 2).

38. Based on the recommendations of the UN Committee against Torture, the new Penal
Code23 adopted in 2008 stipulated an independent criminal offence of torture (Article 265) in
addition to the existing criminalisation of torture in the framework of crimes against humanity
(Article 101, item 6) and war crimes (Article 102, paragraph 1, item 2). In doing so, the
legislator took into account the definition of torture in Article 1 of the Convention against
Torture.

39. The Act ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment24 stipulates that the national preventive
mechanism be the Slovenian Human Rights Ombudsman, exercising tasks and powers of the
national preventive mechanism together with the selected NGOs that gained the humanitarian
organisation status in Slovenia.

40. A specialised department was established within the group of state prosecutors assigned to
prosecute organised crime, functioning under the Office of the State Prosecutor General, in order
to pursue independent investigation of criminal offences of which police officers are suspected.
Since 1 November 2007, the department is exclusively in charge of prosecuting criminal
offences committed by officials employed by the Police.

                                 1. Trafficking in human beings

41. Measures in the area of trafficking in human beings in Slovenia are defined by action plans
for the fight against trafficking in human beings which are drawn up every two years since 2004
by the Interdepartmental working group for the fight against trafficking in human beings,
composed of representatives of the competent ministries, government offices, the National
Assembly and NGOs. These action plans are aimed at defining fundamental activities for
suppressing trafficking in human beings in Slovenia in the field of legislation on investigation
and prosecution of criminal offences related to trafficking in human beings, prevention in the
form of providing information, awareness raising and research activity, assistance to and care for
victims of trafficking in human beings, training, education and international cooperation. On the
basis of these action plans, amendments to the Penal Code were adopted in 2004 in the field of
prostitution and trafficking in human beings; particularly a new criminal offence of trafficking in
human beings (Article 387(a)) was introduced; while Articles 185 (pimping) and 186 (brokering
prostitution) were replaced by a new Article 175 (exploitation through prostitution). In 2005, the
Witness Protection Act25 was adopted, the application of which concerns the protection of the
victims of trafficking in human beings. The Act amending the Criminal Procedure Act was
adopted, which stipulates that minors who are victims of trafficking in human beings shall also
be entitled to an authorised person responsible to care for their rights (Article 387(a) of the Penal
Code). The Aliens Act was amended, which in a special article stipulates the procedures with
aliens victims of trafficking in human beings based on EU directives. By ratifying the Council of
Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings26 Slovenia assumed the
obligations under this regional instrument. Preventive awareness-raising measures addressed to
the public comprise: the Government’s webpage, making videos, reprinting and distributing
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 14

materials, addressing target population within NGO projects co-financed by individual
ministries, educating expert public, especially the Police, in cooperation with NGOs, and training
and educating NGOs by internal experts. There are not many final judgments from the area of
trafficking in human beings, therefore particular attention is also devoted to providing
information for and training of judiciary personnel.

42. The project aimed at the victims of trafficking in human beings has been implemented
since 2008 on the basis of public tenders and financed by the Ministry of the Interior (safe
accommodation, carried out by the Ključ Association) and the Ministry of Labour, Family and
Social Affairs (crisis accommodation, carried out by the Slovenian Karitas).

43. In 2008, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs financed, for the fifth consecutive year, the project
titled “Implementing the mechanism for reconnaissance, assistance and protection of the victims
of trafficking and/or sexual abuse in asylum proceedings in Slovenia” (PATS). There is a
regional component to the project, which is implemented also in Croatia and Bosnia-
Herzegovina.

                            2. Rights of aliens and asylum seekers

44. Article 61 of the Constitution guarantees the right to everyone to express affiliation with
their nation and culture as well to use their language and script. Entry into and residence in
Slovenia are governed by the Aliens Act27, which, in accordance with the European legislation,
ensures fair treatment of aliens who lawfully reside in the country. The rights of aliens are
comparable to those enjoyed by the Slovenian citizens. By adopting the Decree on the
Integration of Aliens, Slovenia introduced active measures of integration policy and in autumn
2009 it will begin to implement basic integration measures aimed at shaping a comprehensive
and effective integration policy based on intercultural dialogue.

45. With regard to asylum policy, Article 48 of the Constitution stipulates that within the limits
of the law, the right of asylum shall be recognised to foreign nationals and stateless persons who
are subject to persecution for their commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms. In
2007, the International Protection Act28 replaced the previous Asylum Act as an umbrella act.
The Act systematically regulates the entire area of international protection in Slovenia. It fully
transposed EU Council directives into Slovenian legislation, which together with two EU
Council decisions provide the legal basis for the Common European Asylum System. The Act
facilitates the introduction of efficient and fast asylum procedures, providing citizens of third
countries with necessary protection and facilitating their integration into Slovenian society; in
case of a negative decision the Act stipulates immediate expulsion of applicants into the country
of origin. Particular attention is devoted to vulnerable groups (applicants, refugees, persons
granted subsidiary protection) as it provides for a positive distinction with regard to material
conditions of acceptance, health care, psychological counselling and care. The principle of
family reunification is taken into consideration for persons enjoying international protection in
accordance with Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. International
protection is granted to each applicant who fulfils conditions under International Protection Act.
If the applicant leaves Slovenia, the procedure is stopped. 50 (per cent) of procedures were
stopped in 2008.
                                                                        A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                        Page 15

46. Official persons conducting international protection procedures are regularly trained and
acquainted with international case law in this area. NGOs take an active part in implementing the
International Protection Act. They play an important role in providing psychosocial and learning
assistance, performing activities for creative leisure pursuits as well as rendering assistance in
integration into the environment. Their role is also significant in preventing and taking
appropriate action in cases of sexual violence and in the area of the fight against trafficking in
human beings. An agreement was signed between the Government and NGOs in June 2008
allowing for a more rapid detection and prevention of sexual violence as well as taking action in
this regard with asylum seekers and refugees.

   3. Persons who were transferred from the register of permanent residence following
                Slovenia’s gaining independence to the register of aliens

47. The Aliens Act29, which was one of the independence laws of Slovenia, defined an alien
and regulated, in respect of the citizens of other republics of the former SFRY who did not apply
for Slovenian citizenship that its provisions began to apply to them on 26 February 1992. They
became aliens on that day and a residence permit was required for their further residence in
Slovenia. On 26 February 1992, permanent residence of those citizens of other republics of the
former SFRY who did not have Slovenian citizenship was discontinued in the register of
permanent residence. In order to regulate their status, the Act Regulating the Legal Status of
Citizens of the Former SFRY Living in the Republic of Slovenia (hereinafter: ZUSDDD)30 was
adopted in 1999 which provided for the acquisition of permanent residence permits under more
favourable conditions than those stipulated in the Aliens Act. The only condition for persons to
obtain permanent residence permits was a de facto residence in Slovenia since 23 December
1990 or since 25 June 1991.

48. In its decision No. U-I-246/02-28 of 3 April 2003, the Constitutional Court decided that the
provisions of the ZUSDDD Act, determining a time limit of three months for filing an
application for the issuance of a permanent residence permit, had to be annulled, and that the
ZUSDDD Act was inconsistent with the Constitution, since 1) it did not recognize permanent
residence to citizens of other republics of the former SFRY, who on 26 February 1992 were
removed from the register of permanent residence, from that date onwards, 2) it did not regulate
the acquisition of a permanent residence permit by citizens of states successors to the former
SFRY for whom the measure of the forcible removal of a foreigner was pronounced, and 3) it
did not prescribe the criteria for establishing the legal concept of “actual presence”. Paragraph 8
of the Decision of the Constitutional Court stipulated that permanent residence of citizens of
other republics of the former SFRY was established from 26 February 1992 onwards if on that
day they were removed from the register of permanent residence, on the basis of a permit for
permanent residence issued in accordance with the ZUSDDD Act or the 1991 Aliens Act, as
amended in 1999. It imposed on the Ministry of the Interior the obligation to issue, as an official
duty, supplementary decisions on the establishment of permanent residence in Slovenia from 26
February 1992 onwards. In item 23 of the Reasoning of its Conclusion No. U-II-3/03-15 of 22
December 2003, the Constitutional Court explained the manner of implementation of paragraph
8 of the Decision No. U-I-246/02-28, namely that the Decision of the Constitutional Court was
the legal basis for issuing supplementary decisions by the Ministry of the Interior. Item 24 of the
Reasoning clarified that the Ministry of the Interior was obliged to follow that part of the
Decision that governs the manner of implementation, until the legislator prescribed otherwise or
regulated the area in a different manner in accordance with the Constitution. With regard to the
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 16

above, the Ministry of the Interior began to issue supplementary decisions on 23 February 2009.
Persons entitled to be issued with a supplementary decision are those whose permanent residence
registration in Slovenia had terminated and those who have already obtained a permanent
residence permit in Slovenia. The Ministry of the Interior is drafting a law which will remedy
other established inconsistencies of the ZUSDDD Act with the Constitution.

                                    4. Freedom of expression

49. Media activities in Slovenia are based on the freedom of expression, the inviolability and
protection of human personality and dignity, the free flow of information, media openness to
different opinions and beliefs and to diverse content, the autonomy of editorial personnel,
journalists and other authors in creating programming in accordance with programme concepts
and professional codes, and the personal responsibility of journalists, other authors of pieces and
editorial personnel for the consequences of their work. The dissemination of programming that
encourages ethnic, racial, religious, sexual or any other inequality, or violence and war, or incites
ethnic, racial, religious, sexual or any other hatred and intolerance is prohibited. Certain articles
of the Media Act31 also refer to the human rights protection. The Act stipulates that advertising
may not prejudice respect for human dignity, incite discrimination on the grounds of race, sex or
ethnicity, or political or religious intolerance, encourage behaviour damaging to public health or
safety or to the protection of the environment and the cultural heritage, give offence on the
grounds of religious or political beliefs, or damage consumers' interests. A special right under the
Act is the right to correction or reply based on which any person has the right to demand that the
responsible editor publish free-of-charge a correction by such person to any report published that
infringed upon the person’s rights or interests. In advertising, special provisions refer to children.
Advertisements that are targeted at children or in which children appear may not contain scenes
of violence, pornography or any other content that could damage their health or mental and
physical development or otherwise have a negative effect on them. Advertising may not be
morally or mentally prejudicial to children, may not encourage children to purchase products or
services by exploiting their inexperience or credulity, may not encourage children to convince
their parents or any other person to purchase products or services, and may not unjustifiably
show children in dangerous situations.

                                    5. Freedom of conscience

50. Freedom of conscience is provided for by Article 41 of the Constitution, referring to
religious belief as well as moral, philosophical and other convictions. Any individual may be of
any religious or other conviction and may freely profess his/her religious belief, or may not be of
religious conviction, may not declare his/her religious beliefs and in this regard is not obliged to
declare him-/herself. Any forcing to such declaration would mean infringement of such
individual’s integrity and denial of his/her free declaration. As a result of this freedom, everyone
has the right to be or not to be a member of any religious community, as well as he/she should
not be limited in becoming a member of or leaving a religious community. The Religious
Freedom Act32 governs and ensures the exercise of religious freedom as well as stipulates the
register of churches and other religious communities, criteria, conditions and the procedure for
the registration of churches and other religious communities, and the rights of registered
churches and other religious communities and their members. The Commission of the
Government of the Republic of Slovenia for the resolution of outstanding issues of religious
communities was established by the Government to discuss open issues related to the
                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                         Page 17

relationship between the state and religious communities. The Slovenian Government Office for
Religious Communities holds consultations of representatives of churches and other religious
communities on the topics of interest for religious communities, providing them with
information about legislation, their rights and the method of their exercising. In recent years, the
Office organised several one-day and two-day meetings of representatives of churches and other
religious communities, which are an important part of cooperation between the state, churches
and other religious communities, and among different churches and other religious communities.

                            E. Economic, social and cultural rights

                                            1. Poverty

51. Slovenia combats poverty with various statutory and programme measures. According to
the Parental Protection and Family Benefits Act33, families with three or more children are
entitled to a large family allowance, paid once a year as a lump sum. In single-parent families,
child benefit is increased by 10 per cent, and financial social assistance by 30 per cent pursuant
to the Social Security Act34. Other measures to combat poverty include subsidised rents;
subsidised pre-school care; subsidised transport for students, textbook funds and scholarships;
active employment policy programmes and experimental programmes under the EQUAL
initiative for the employment of vulnerable groups (disabled persons, migrants, Roma); free legal
assistance; personal income tax relief and relief from certain other taxes; and exemption from
payment for compulsory health insurance. The National Social Protection and Social Inclusion
Strategy for the 2008–2010 Period aims to increase social inclusion of individuals and contribute
to social cohesion, improve access to and the quality of social services of general interest, and
improve the efficiency and adequacy of social transfers by modernising social protection systems
and institutions. In order to fight inflation, the Government, by amending the Act on Regulating
Adjustments of Transfers to Individuals and Households35 decided in 2008 that transfers would
be adjusted twice a year In the area of employment, in 2009 the Ministry of Labour, Family and
Social Affairs revised the Catalogue of Active Employment Policy Measures to help the
unemployed who will be looking for new opportunities in the crisis; introduced co-financing of
education and training for the employed and unemployed as well as for young people entering
the labour market; encouraged self-employment and transfer of workers to more promising
posts; and provided support for development projects, such as social economy. The Ministry is
planning a comprehensive review of the current employment and unemployment insurance
legislation, with a view to expanding the range of beneficiaries of unemployment compensation,
especially to young people. The new act will aim at extending the right to compensation under
more favourable conditions also to fixed-term employees, who are primarily young people.

                                           2. Education

52. The Constitution guarantees fundamental rights pertaining to education. According to the
Constitution, physically or mentally handicapped children and other severely disabled persons
have the right to education and training for an active life in society. Under the Organisation and
Financing of Education Act,36 education shall aim at guaranteeing optimum development to
individuals regardless of their sex, social and cultural background, religion, racial, ethnic or
national origin, and physical and mental handicaps; educating for mutual tolerance, developing
the awareness of the equality of rights for men and women, respect for human diversity and
mutual cooperation, respect for children’s and human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 18

fostering equal opportunities for both sexes in education. The Elementary School Act37 also
deals with the rights of the national communities, rights of the Roma community, foreign
nationals and children with special needs. Education Guidelines for Sustainable Development
from Pre-school to University Education, adopted in 2007, promote intercultural dialogue,
quality interpersonal relations and development of social skills (non-violence, tolerance,
cooperation, respect). The Ministry of Education and Sport publishes calls for applications for
research projects on the prevention of violence and intercultural dialogue, for projects carried out
by educational institutions (recognition and prevention of violence, education for gender
equality), and for training of educational professionals (for tolerance and acceptance of diversity,
intercultural cooperation and learning, promotion of intercultural dialogue, equal opportunities,
and the recognition and prevention of violence). Several projects are underway, teaching respect
for human rights.

53. Mutual understanding between different linguistic groups is promoted within the
syllabuses of Slovenian language, geography, history, social studies, civic education, ethics and
civic culture.

                                          3. Health care

54. Health legislation provides for health care that is equal, appropriate, of high quality and
safe. The Patients Rights Act38 stipulates the rights of patients as users of health care services in
their relations with health care providers and the procedures for the exercise of these rights. The
Ministry of Health identified the protection of rights of vulnerable population groups as a
priority in the area of health protection and human rights, with a special emphasis on people with
mental disorders, people with serious chronic illnesses and elderly people, on the rights related to
advances in biomedicine, activities focusing on health promotion and the prevention of addiction
and other illnesses, as well as comprehensive health care and combating exclusion. The Mental
Health Act39 provides for the protection of rights of persons with a mental disorder in all kinds of
treatment on closely supervised wards of psychiatric hospitals, closed wards of social welfare
institutions and under supervised treatment, and determines involuntary hospitalisation
procedures. Owing to an ever increasing need for geriatric services, the Ministry of Health is - in
collaboration with other relevant ministries - drafting the legal bases for prolonged health care
and comprehensive care for the elderly, especially those with cognitive disorders. The entire
population enjoys equal rights arising from compulsory health insurance and voluntary health
insurance.

     4. Right to adequate housing (housing for young families, the elderly and socially
                                     disadvantaged)

55. Since 2005, non-profit rents have been subsidized. Households are eligible to a subsidy
amounting to 80 per cent of a non-profit rent. The 2008 amendment to the Housing Act extends
eligibility to tenants of profit apartments who fulfil the criteria for a non-profit apartment but
cannot rent one for reasons of unavailability.

56. Under housing legislation, municipalities are responsible for providing housing units. The
term does not refer to apartments, but to units in special purpose buildings, intended as
temporary housing solutions. No call for applications or similar procedure is needed for the
allocation of a housing unit, since future social status cannot be envisaged and the list of
                                                                       A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                       Page 19

beneficiaries should be kept open to help the needy, homeless and victims of violence. In this
way, quick response to social and housing distress of individual families is possible.

57. The Government has been resolving the housing issue of young families pursuant to the
National Housing Saving Scheme Act40 by subsidising young families when buying, building,
reconstructing or converting their first apartment. The Housing Fund of the Republic of Slovenia
publishes an annual call for applications for subsidies to young families; about 2,000 families
have already benefited from this scheme. Non-profit rental apartments are allocated also through
municipal calls for applications,41 in which priority is given to vulnerable groups, such as young
people and families, large families, disabled persons and their families, citizens with long work
experience who lack appropriate housing, and individuals engaging in activities of special
importance for the local community. With a view to providing housing for the retired, a real-
estate fund of the pension and disability insurance has been set up, having at its disposal more
than 3,000 rental apartments intended to resolve housing issues of retired persons.

                                        5. Right to work

58. Article 49 of the Constitution guarantees freedom of work and stipulates that everyone
shall have access under equal conditions to any position of employment. Forced labour is
prohibited. The Employment Relationship Act includes the provision of concluding an
employment contract for an indefinite period of time. Concluding fixed-term employment
contracts is envisaged in exceptional cases only. International documents adopted within the
ILO, Council of Europe and the EU, similarly, treat fixed-term employment as a special type of
work which is not equal to employment for an indefinite period of time. In the Framework
Agreement on Fixed-term Work,42 European social partners recognise that short-term
employment contracts respond, in certain circumstances, to the needs of both employers and
workers; however, contracts of an indefinite duration are the general form of employment
relationship.

59. For flexibility reasons, the Employment Relationship Act stipulates fixed-term
employment contracts as one of the bases defining an employment relationship, subject to certain
limitations and special features. During fixed-term employment, the contracting parties have the
same rights and obligations as in the case of employment for an indefinite period of time. Special
features relate to the method and reasons for terminating an employment relationship: expiry of
the time for which it was concluded, completion of the agreed work or cessation of the reason for
which the contract was concluded. Since fixed-term employees are not afforded protection
against termination of employment, the Act emphasises the importance of form: the intention of
the contracting parties to conclude an employment contract for a definite period of time must be
laid down in writing; otherwise, the employment contract is assumed to be concluded for an
indefinite period of time. The Act limits the conclusion of fixed-term contracts to cases
stipulated by law and collective agreements, sets a time limit for concluding such contracts and
limits the conclusion of successive contracts. If a fixed-term employment contract is concluded
illegally, it is assumed that the worker had concluded an employment contract for an indefinite
period of time.

60. More than any other age group, young people in Slovenia are subjected to temporary and
short-term employment, which reduces their level of social security. Of all young people in the
labour market in 2007, 68.3 per cent were temporarily employed (including student jobs), while
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 20

among the entire working population the ratio was 17.2 per cent. With a view to improving
employability of young people, the relevant Ministry intends to publish in September 2009 a call
for applications for training and employment of university graduates, and is planning to reform
the scholarship system, the employment of long-term unemployed (only in the non-market
sector) and to publish call for applications for public work (for the non-market and non-profit
sectors). Education and training programmes focus on increasing competitiveness and
employability, as well.

                                      6. Migrant workers

61. Economic and labour migration in Slovenia is governed by the Employment and Work of
Aliens Act43 and the Aliens Act. Sector-specific laws are also important, regulating the socio-
economic status and other rights of foreign nationals in Slovenia. The latest amendments to the
Employment and Work of Aliens Act of 2007 (Ur. l. RS No. 52/07) alleviated the conditions for
employment of third country nationals (elimination of certain administrative barriers to obtaining
work permits) and transposed EU legislation on legal migration to the Slovenian legal order.

                     IV. ACHIEVEMENTS AND GOOD PRACTICES

                   A. Rights of the national and other ethnic communities

62. Slovenia guarantees a high level of protection of rights to members of the Italian and
Hungarian national communities, including their collective rights. Members of both national
communities have the right to education in their mother tongue and consistent bilingualism,
including bilingual topographic signs.

63. In recent years, the rights of Roma have improved significantly. In 2007 an umbrella act
on the Roma community has been adopted, based on Article 65 of the Constitution. Progress has
also been achieved in the areas of information activities, education, housing, health and
combating discrimination. Local radio and television stations have for several years prepared
programmes for Roma; since 2007 these have also been broadcast by the national radio station
and since 2008 by the national television. In 2008, the Roma information centre within the Union
of Roma of Slovenia was assigned a local radio frequency for the wider Murska Sobota area and
has been broadcasting its own programme. The “Tackling Health Inequalities” scheme, focusing
on Roma as a vulnerable group, has been successfully underway. In 2008 Slovenia joined the
campaign to eliminate prejudice against Roma “Dosta! Go beyond prejudice, discover the
Roma” launched by the Council of Europe and the European Commission and intended to raise
awareness among the majority population of the presence of Roma, their culture and lifestyle and
to overcome stereotypes and prejudice.
                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                         Page 21

                                       1. Children’s rights

64. Prior to the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts, the Service in the Slovenian Armed
Forces Act44 was amended; its Article 7 now stipulates that military service or other jobs in the
army cannot be performed by persons under 18 years of age.

65. In its Resolution on the National Social Assistance Programme 2006–2010,45 the Ministry
of Labour, Family and Social Affairs defined a network of maternity homes and shelters for
women and children, with current capacity for about 330 persons. Safe houses and maternity
homes only receive co-financing from the Ministry. The initiative for launching such
programmes has to stem from the local communities or individual organisations within them.
The majority of programmes in the network operate in the form of public social institutions.

                                        2. Migrant rights

66. In 2007, the Minister of Education and Sport adopted the Strategy for the Integration of
Migrant Children and Primary and Secondary School Students in the Education System in the
Republic of Slovenia. Its most important measures include: adapted curriculum to enable fast
and successful integration into the education process; drafting of strategies for cooperation with
parents and their involvement in school life; encouraging intercultural learning and a positive
attitude towards understanding and accepting diversity; Slovenian as a second language; teaching
of migrant children’s mother tongues; education and training of teaching professionals. The
Ministry published a call for applications based on the strategy with a view to providing
conditions for the implementation of measures defined therein and developing mechanisms that
would contribute to a more effective integration of migrant students into the school system and
their better integration into society, and improve their status in the labour market. Training
programmes for teaching professionals are being carried out, aimed at ensuring successful work
with migrant children and adolescents.

                              3. Rights of persons with disabilities

67. In 2003, the Federation of Disabled Workers of Slovenia prepared the project of “a
disabled-friendly municipality”, encouraging municipalities to actively respond to needs of
citizens with disabilities. By the end of 2008 this title was awarded to 9 municipalities, which
had to analyse the situation, together with local organisations of persons with disabilities, and
adopt programmes of action. The awarded municipalities must submit annual reports on the
implementation of the action programme to the Federation.

                          4. Human rights education of police officers

68. In collaboration with external experts, the Police have been carrying out permanent
training of police officers on domestic violence prevention. This year they will start
implementing the CEPOL common curriculum. In cooperation with the Slovenian and the
Swedish human rights ombudsman, the Police organised a training programme for identifying
and dealing with stereotypes in a multiethnic society. The training was aimed at increasing
familiarity with the relevant international legal instruments and their importance for police work,
and learning about cultural and ethnic diversity.
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 22

                                  5. Economic and social rights

69. In view of the current financial and economic crisis, Slovenia in 2009 included two
employment acts for the recovery of the economy, and successfully curbed employment decline
and dismissals. The Partially Subsidizing of Full-time Work Act46 was adopted to help the
companies in which orders and operations decreased up to 30 per cent owing to the global
financial and economic crisis. The Partial Reimbursement of Payment Compensation Act47
allows companies to temporarily lay off workers. In such cases, workers are entitled to wage
compensation amounting to 85 per cent of their salary, of which 50 per cent is paid from the state
budget and 35 per cent by the employer. Pursuant to the EU regulation increasing the threshold
for state aid to companies that entered in difficulty after 1 July 2008, the Ministry of Labour,
Family and Social Affairs together with the Ministry of the Economy published a public tender
encouraging transfer of workers and self-employment in the years 2009 and 2010.

                                        6. Cultural rights

70. The Division for Minority Cultural Rights at the Ministry of Culture has been
systematically creating conditions for the protection of cultural rights of national and other ethnic
communities and immigrants. In 2005, the Ministry established an internal working group on
human rights which deliberates on the exercising of cultural rights as a category of human rights.
The Association of Museums of Slovenia is preparing a handbook entitled “Designing an
accessible museum”, which will encourage better accessibility of disabled and elderly persons to
museum collections.

              V. NATIONAL PRIORITIES REGARDING HUMAN RIGHTS

71. The Slovenian authorities are endeavouring to grant all people living on Slovenian territory
all human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution and international agreements that
are binding on the Republic of Slovenia. Special attention is devoted to children’s and women’s
rights, rights of persons with disabilities and members of national and other ethnic communities.
The Government is giving priority to the outstanding issues of trial within a reasonable time
(reduction in court backlogs), persons who were transferred from the register of permanent
residence following Slovenia’s gaining independence to the register of aliens, and improving the
rights of same-sex partnerships. Particular attention is dedicated to regular dialogue with bodies
established by human rights treaties and other human rights mechanisms at the regional and
universal levels.

72. Priority objectives in the field of gender equality in Slovenia include equal power,
influence and responsibilities of women and men, economic independence, equal sharing of
unpaid work, including caring for children, the elderly and other family members in need of
help, and the elimination of all forms of violence against women.

73. Slovenia endeavours to consistently respect and implement the rights of the Italian and
Hungarian national communities and the Roma community under the Constitution and other
laws. In the future, it will especially strive to overcome prejudices and stereotypes towards
Roma, and implement their economic, social and civil rights. As regards the rights of members
of the nations of the former Yugoslavia, the Government will encourage endeavours to preserve
their languages and cultures.
                                                                                    A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
                                                                                    Page 23

                                             VI. CONCLUSION

74. In eighteen years of independence, Slovenia has done great work in shaping all segments
of the new state, establishing and building its institutions, and ensuring their efficiency. Great
advances have been made in the process of the democratisation of society, as well as in the
promotion and protection of human rights. We are proud of our achievements; however, we are
well aware of our shortcomings. Therefore, we are willing to accept criticism and pursue an open
dialogue with all stakeholders within the framework of the Universal Periodic Review, which we
perceive as an ongoing process. Our final aim is to improve the human rights situation in the
country, and to reduce the number of human rights violations, of their victims and seriousness to
the greatest possible extent.


Notes

1
  Members of the Interministerial Commission on Human Rights include, apart from representatives of ministries
and government offices, also external experts on human rights (from universities and institutes), representatives of
non-governmental organisations and the Human Rights Ombudsman.
2
  Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia (Ur. l. RS Nos. 33/91-I, 42/97, 66/2000, 24/03, 69/04).
3
  Ur. l. RS Nos. 71/93, 15/94.
4
  Ur. l. RS No. 93/2007 (official consolidated text 1).
5
  Ur. l. RS No. 59/2002.
6
  Ur. l. RS No. 16/2008.
7
  Ur. l. RS No. 94/2007 (official consolidated text 1).
8
  Ur. l. RS No. 64/2007 (official consolidated text 1).
9
  There are 43 registered religious communities in Slovenia.
10
   Judgement No. 23032/02, 2005.
11
   Ur. l. RS No. 49/2006.
12
   This was the Court’s assessment in the case of Grzinčič v. Slovenia (judgement, application No. 26867/02, 3 May
2007) and the case of Korenjak v. Slovenia (decision, application No. 463/03, 15 May 2007).
13
   Ur. l. RS No. 95/2004 (official consolidated text 1), 55/2008.
14
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 42/2002, 79/2006, 103/2007, 45/2008.
15
   Ur. l. RS No. 65/2005.
16
   Ur. l. SRS Nos. 15/1976 and 23/1978 and Ur. l. RS No. 67/2001.
17
   http://www.us-rs.si/
18
   Ur. l. RS No. 16/2007 (official consolidated text 2).
19
   Ur. l. RS No. 65/1994.
20
   Ur. l. RS No. 65/1994.
21
   Ur. l. RS No. 33/2007.
22
    The Rules on the organisation and work of multidisciplinary teams and regional services and on actions of the
social work centres in dealing with domestic violence entered into force on 20 April 2009. The Rules on the
Treatment of Domestic Violence for Educational Institutions will enter into force at the end of 2009. The Ministry
of Health drafted the Rules and procedures in dealing with family violence when performing health services and
established a working group which will, by the end of 2009, draw up clinical guidelines and an educational
programme of medical personnel for dealing with family violence when performing health services.
23
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 55/2008, 39/2009.
24
   Ur. l. RS, Mednarodne pogodbe, No. 20/2006.
25
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 113/2005, 81/2006 (official consolidated text 1), 110/2007.
26
   Ur. l. RS No. 62/2009.
27
   Ur. l. RS No. 64/2009 (official consolidated text 6).
28
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 111/2007, 58/2009.
29
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 1/1991-1, 44/1997.
30
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 61/1999, 54/2000.
A/HRC/WG.6/7/SVN/1
Page 24

31
   Ur. l. RS No. 110/2006 (official consolidated text 1)
32
   Ur. l. RS No. 14/2007
33
   Ur. l. RS, Nos. 110/2006 (official consolidated text 2), 10/2008.
34
   Ur. l. RS No. 3/2007 (official consolidated text 2).
35
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 114/2006, 71/2007.
36
   Ur. l. RS No. 16/2007 (official consolidated text 5), 36/2008, 58/2009.
37
   Ur. l. RS No. 81/2006 (official consolidated text 3), 102/2007.
38
   Ur. l. RS No. 15/2008.
39
   Ur. l. RS No. 77/2008.
40
   Ur. l. RS No. 96/2007 (official consolidated text 2).
41
   Ur. l. RS Nos. 42/2002 and 103/2007.
42
   Directive 1999/70/EC – concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE
   and CEEP.
43
   Ur. l. RS No. 76/2007 (official consolidated text 2).
44
   Ur. l. RS No. 68/2007.
45
   Ur. l. RS No. 39/2006.
46
   Ur. l. RS No. 5/2009.
47
   Ur. l. RS No. 42/2009


                                                  ------
