                   ADVANCE QUESTIONS TO SLOVENIA


DENMARK

  •   Which steps is Slovenia planning to take, in order to secure that all of the
      “erased” gain their rights as Slovene citizens?

  •   When is it expected that the status of the “erased” will be solved?


SWEDEN

  •   Sweden welcomes the efforts made by the Government of Slovenia to address
      the issue of the Roma situation. In its report to the UPR, Slovenia lists
      measures it is taking to protect the rights of members of the Roma minority. At
      the same time, civil society reports indicate that the Romani minority continue
      to face discrimination in access to education, housing, health care and other
      services, as well as persistent prejudice and hostility.

  •   Could the Government of Slovenia elaborate on how the measures taken to
      eliminate discrimination of the Romani minority and ensure their full
      enjoyment of human rights will be evaluated and followed-up on?

  •   A year after Slovenia’s declaration of independence in 1991, more than 18,000
      individuals were removed from the registry of permanent residents. They were
      people originating from other former Yugoslav republics, many of them
      Roma, who had been living in Slovenia but had not acquired Slovenian
      citizenship after independence. The move was reported to have been
      discriminatory in the sense that citizens of former Yugoslav republics were
      treated less favourably than other foreign nationals whose permanent
      residency status was granted automatically. Credible reports states that the
      authorities continues to fail to guarantee the rights of a group of permanent
      residents known as the “erased” yet Constitutional Court decisions found the
      “erasure” illegal and anti-constitutional.

  •   Could the Government of Slovenia elaborate on the measures it is taking to
      ensure that legislative and other measures are adopted to ensure that the rights
      of all individuals removed from the registry of permanent residents following
      independence are respected with regard to reparation in accordance with
      Slovenia’s international obligations?


UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN & NORTHERN IRELAND

  •   We should be grateful if you would provide information on the extent to which
      civil society was pro-actively consulted in the preparation of your national
      report. What plans are there to involve them in the follow-up to the review?
•   We welcome the role of the Human Rights Ombudsman in Slovenia, and
    would be interested to know whether Slovenia has an independent national
    human rights institution which operates in accordance with the Paris principles
    designed to guide the practice of such institutions?

•   We would be interested to find out more information about your draft national
    programme of measures to regulate the rights of the Roma community; which
    areas where the Roma currently experience discrimination will be addressed;
    what the timetable is for its implementation, and how its success will be
    measured.

•   Please could you inform us if the Lukenda Project is on course to eliminate all
    backlogs in courts and prosecutor’s offices by 31 December 2010.

•   We should be grateful to know how successful the measures taken by the
    Equal Opportunities Office to reduce discrimination and prejudice against
    women have been, and what plans Slovenia has to change the stereotypical
    attitudes         towards           women            in           society.

•   We should be grateful to know what measures Slovenia has taken to close the
    gender pay gap, and what steps Slovenia intends to take to encourage the
    participation of women in the labour market in both the public and private
    sector.

•   Please could you inform us what the expected timescale is for implementation
    of the law being drafted to resolve discrepancies between the ZUSDDD Act
    and the Constitution. Will this law restore residency status to all those
    nationals of the former Yugoslavia, whose names were removed from
    population registers in 1992?


                                     ------
