              ADVANCE QUESTIONS TO SLOVENIA – ADD.1


ARGENTINA

  Adopción de políticas
  • El CRC observó, en el período 2008-2009, la ausencia de un plan específico
    para la lucha contra la venta de menores, prostitución infantil y pornografía
    infantil, y solicitó que se proveyera de recursos financieros suficientes a las
    áreas competentes para encarar tales acciones. La delegación argentina
    desearía preguntar qué medidas se han implementado al respecto.

  Derechos de la mujer.
  • En los informes del CESCR existían varios aspectos negativos en lo relativo al
     desenvolvimiento social de la mujer, acceso al mercado laboral, puestos
     directivos, la recepción de igual salario por igual tarea, y el limitado número
     de mujeres en altos puestos de decisión. Al respecto nos interesaría saber qué
     medidas han sido adoptadas tendientes a revertir la situación descripta?

  •   Con respecto a la violencia doméstica contra la mujer, en 2008 CEDAW
      manifestó su preocupación por la persistencia de este flagelo, sobretodo
      perpetrado por sus parejas, más allá de las reformas realizadas al código penal
      y la entrada en vigor del Domestic Violence Prevention Act 2008. La
      Argentina desea preguntar qué medidas se han tomado para prevenir, eliminar
      y monitorear las políticas llevadas a cabo para combatir la violencia doméstica
      así como qué medidas específicas se han tomado para acrecentar la protección
      de las víctimas.

  Protección de Minorías
  • Conforme las recomendaciones de diversas ONG´s y Comités, cuáles han sido
     las medidas aplicadas tendientes a garantizar a los miembros de la etnia
     romani, especialmente mujeres y niñas, el acceso a los servicios de salud,
     educación, trabajo, como condición esencial para su desenvolvimiento pleno
     en la sociedad eslovena?

  Tráfico de Personas
  • Desde el año 2008, la CEDAW observa que pese al incremento del tráfico de
     personas, y a la detención e inicio de procedimientos penales contra los
     presuntos culpables, no obstante, no se habían registrado sentencias
     condenatorias de la justicia. Siendo la condena de la justicia parte de la lucha
     contra el tráfico de personas, y parte de la criminalización de tales conductas,
     la delegación argentina desea saber si a la fecha han habido sentencias penales
     condenatorias por parte de la justicia eslovena.

                     [Informal translation provided by Argentina]

  •   The CRC has noted in the period 2008-2009, the absence of a specific plan for
      combating the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and
      recommended adequate financial resources to address the relevant areas such
      actions. The delegation of Argentina would like to ask what measures have
      been implemented in this regard.
  •   In the CESCR reports there were several comments related to the development
      of women, access to labor market positions, receiving equal pay for equal
      work, and the limited number of women in senior decision making positions.
      In this regard, we would like to know what steps have been taken aimed at
      overcoming the challenges described?

  •   With regard to domestic violence against women, in 2008, CEDAW expressed
      concern about the persistence of this scourge, mainly perpetrated by partners.
      Argentina would like to ask what steps have been taken to prevent, eliminate
      and monitor policies undertaken to combat domestic violence and what
      specific measures have been taken to enhance the protection of victims

  •   Which measures have been implemented aimed at ensuring that members of
      the Roma, particularly women and girls, access to health services, education
      and work, an essential condition for development full in Slovenian society?

  •   Since 2008, CEDAW noted that despite the increase in human trafficking, as
      well as the arrest and initiation of criminal proceedings against alleged
      offenders, however, there had been no convictions of justice. In this regard, we
      would like to know if there have been cases of criminal conviction by the
      Slovenian justice.


CZECH REPUBLIC

 •    What specific measures has the Government adopted to strengthen effective
      protection against discrimination with regard to women, national minorities,
      persons of minority sexual orientation or gender identity and persons with
      disabilities?
 •    What measures does the Government adopt to decrease vulnerability of women
      and girls to trafficking and what specific measures are in place to assist victims
      of trafficking?
 •    How is ensured national implementation of obligations from the 1951 Refugee
      Status Convention and the 1967 Protocol thereto?
 •    What human rights education and training is provided to members of the police,
      prison and detention staff and judiciary? Do these educational programs
      include specifically sensitisation on protection of rights of minorities, women
      and children? How is ensured accountability of members of the police, prison
      and detention staff and judiciary for possible violations of human rights? Is
      there any complaint mechanism for victims of torture or ill-treatment?
 •    Does the Government lead any awareness raising campaigns to prevent hate
      speech and negative stereotypes against national and other minorities?
NORWAY

 •   How has Slovenia included representatives of civil society in the reporting
     process and how do you intend to include these actors in the process of follow
     up to UPR recommendations.

 •   The legislative motion retroactively reinstating permanent resident status to
     “the erased” was adopted by the government in December 2009. We would like
     to ask whether there is an outreach campaign planned for those “erased” who
     currently live abroad, as many of them might not be aware of the existence of
     the amendment.

 •   CEDAW called on Slovenia to strengthen its efforts to increase the number of
     women participating in political life, in particular at the national level. We
     would like to ask Slovenia how they plan to enhance awareness-raising on the
     importance of women’s participation in political life.

 •   We would like to ask Slovenia how they plan to address the issue of gender
     based violence and how they plan to develop a comprehensive strategy or
     action plan to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and
     girls.



                                      ------
