             United Nations                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1
             General Assembly                                                              Distr.: General
                                                                                           6 August 2019

                                                                                           Original: English




Human Rights Council
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
Thirty-fourth session
4–15 November 2019


            National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of
            the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21*

            Slovenia




         * The present document has been reproduced as received. Its content does not imply the expression of
            any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations.


GE.19-13424(E)


A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1



      I. Introduction
           1.     In June 2017, the Republic of Slovenia (hereinafter Slovenia) submitted to the
           Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights the Voluntary UPR Mid-term
           Report of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia on the Implementation of the
           Recommendations Accepted during the Second Cycle of the Universal Periodic Review.
           Both the Inter-Ministerial Commission on Human Rights and non-governmental
           organisations (NGOs) have been regularly informed about the implementation.
           2.     Slovenia’s preparations for the third cycle of the Universal Periodic Review (UPR)
           were launched in autumn 2018. The Third National Report was coordinated by the Ministry
           of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Slovenia and prepared in cooperation with the
           competent ministries and government offices. The draft Report was endorsed by the Inter-
           Ministerial Commission on Human Rights, and the Report was adopted by the Government
           of the Republic of Slovenia (hereinafter “the Government”) on 20 June 2019.
           3.   During the drafting of the Report, NGOs, the Human Rights Ombudsman and the
           Advocate of the Principle of Equality were consulted, and they were informed about the
           UPR Review Process and Slovenia’s preparations for the national review.


     II. Implementation of recommendations from the previous
         cycles
           4.     This section presents information on the implementation of the recommendations
           accepted by the Government, which are numbered as in paragraph 115 of the Report of the
           Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review of Slovenia (document No.
           A/HRC/28/15).


      A.   International obligations

           Recommendations 1–5, 14–16, 18, 43, 133
           5.    After the second cycle, Slovenia ratified the Council of Europe Convention on
           Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (19 December
           2014) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a
           communications procedure (20 March 2018).
           6.     The analysis and evaluation of the possible effects of the ratification of the
           International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
           are being conducted by the competent ministry (i.e. the Ministry of Justice). Preliminary
           analysis shows that amendments to the substantive and procedural provisions of Slovenian
           criminal legislation would probably be necessary for the ratification of the Convention.
           7.     The protective provisions of ILO Convention No. 189 Concerning Decent Work for
           Domestic Workers have been implemented in national legislation. Domestic workers are
           treated equally as other workers. The relevant constitutional provisions, the labour law (the
           Employment Relationships Act), the legislation on safety and health at work, social
           security, the Minimum Wage Act, and other regulations apply to all workers.
           8.   The ratification process for the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
           Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the amendments to Article 8 of the International
           Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination is under way.
           9.     Slovenia strives to regularly meet its reporting obligations to treaty bodies. Slovenia
           submitted its Third Periodic Report to the UN Human Rights Committee on 6 July 2014,
           and presented it on 15 and 16 March 2016, thus implementing recommendation 43.




2
                                                                                        A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


B.   Institutional framework of human rights protection

     Recommendations 22, 31–39
     10.    Slovenia fulfilled its obligation of establishing a national human rights institution
     under Group A of the Paris Principles at the legislative level. The National Assembly of
     the Republic of Slovenia adopted the Act Amending the Human Rights Ombudsman Act,
     which entered into force on 14 October 2017, providing a legal basis for broadening the
     powers of the institute of the Human Rights Ombudsman so as to enable the Ombudsman
     to implement all international principles and to obtain status A in accordance with the 1993
     Paris Principles relating to the status of national human rights institutions. The Human
     Rights Ombudsman has already applied for status A.
     11.     The Act Amending the Human Rights Ombudsman Act stipulates additional
     systemic tasks of the Ombudsman and provides funding for their implementation.
     Additional seven people are planned to be employed in the Office of the Ombudsman by
     2020. Furthermore, the Council of Human Rights and the Centre for Human Rights was
     established. Since 2018, the Office of the Ombudsman also has children’s rights advocates.1
     12.    In October 2016, the Advocate of the Principle of Equality, i.e. the national body
     for equality, was established under the Protection against Discrimination Act. 2 The
     Advocate addresses discrimination against persons based on their personal circumstances in
     all spheres of social life. The Advocate implements its tasks and powers under the
     Protection against Discrimination Act both at the systemic and individual levels. 3 In 2019
     the Advocate received sufficient funds to enable its capacity-building for the
     implementation of the wide range of its statutory tasks and powers.


C.   Non-discrimination

     Recommendations 44–58, 62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 74, 76, 78–81, 85, 90, 92, 93, 98
     13.    In Slovenia protection against discrimination is enshrined in the Constitution and
     the Protection against Discrimination Act. 4 The Government strives to carry out measures
     to eliminate discrimination and to raise awareness.
     14.    By establishing the Advocate of the Principle of Equality as the national body for
     equality, and by fulfilling the basic conditions for its work, Slovenia has made important
     steps towards protection against discrimination and the promotion of equality. In the 2017
     and 2018 annual reports, the Advocate drew attention to the key challenges concerning
     non-discrimination. In 2017, the Advocate conducted the first comprehensive research on
     the perception of discrimination by the Slovenian public. Since 2019, the Advocate has
     visited the Slovenian regions to talk to the relevant stakeholders, thus indirectly raising
     public awareness of non-discrimination nationwide. In 2018, the Advocate addressed 223
     cases (130 cases from past years and 93 new ones), with 149 cases concluded and 74 cases
     deferred to 2019. In 2018, the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal
     Opportunities published a public call for proposals for awareness-raising and NGO
     training concerning the importance of and strengthening equality, the understanding and
     prevention of discrimination, and options for protection against discrimination for the most
     exposed groups in Slovenia. Since February 2019, Slovenia has been implementing a
     project of raising awareness of discrimination and a project concerning discrimination
     against people with disabilities.
     15.    Hate speech is criminalised in Slovenia in the framework of Article 297 of the
     Criminal Code of the Republic of Slovenia. 5 Slovenia dedicates special attention to public
     awareness-raising and responding to intolerance. 6 The Constitution of the Republic of
     Slovenia guarantees freedom of expression. The Government strives for zero tolerance of
     hate speech and demands from the national authorities to strictly respect the Constitution
     and the law.
     16.    In 2016, Slovenia adopted the Civil Union Act, granting equal status as marriage to
     the civil union of heterosexual couples and of same-sex couples, except in the part relating
     to medically assisted procreation and the joint adoption of children.


                                                                                                          3
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


           17.    Measures to eliminate discrimination against members of certain groups are
           presented in sections II.F–II.K.


      D.   Political and civil rights

           Recommendations 64, 73, 97, 103, 128–130, 134, 149
           18.     Political and civil rights are enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of
           Slovenia and further governed by the relevant legislation. Slovenia strives to implement the
           political and civil rights of the people living in Slovenia through legislation and other
           measures.
           19.     Slovenia ensures protection against any interference with the work,
           establishment and leadership of trade unions, and punishes any such interference.
           Slovenia's regulation is based on relevant treaties' provisions governing trade unions and
           protected by the Constitution. 7 Furthermore, the establishment and work of trade unions is
           regulated under the Representativeness of Trade Unions Act. The concrete powers of trade
           unions and the work and protection of trade union representatives are defined in the
           Employment Relationships Act. The two acts also provide for judicial protection.
           Collective labour disputes concerning trade union powers with regard to employment
           relationships fall within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court. The Labour Court also has
           jurisdiction over interference with trade union autonomy, with workers’ right to join trade
           unions and with the powers of trade unions regarding their members. Violation of trade
           union rights is a criminal offence against employment and social security in accordance
           with Article 200 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Slovenia.
           20.    Slovenia ensures freedom of religion in accordance with treaties, the Constitution,
           and the Freedom of Religion Act. 8 In 2015, Slovenia established the Council for Dialogue
           on Freedom of Religion, operating within the Ministry of Culture’s Office for Religious
           Communities. The Council enables open and transparent dialogue at the institutional level
           between the highest executive authority and religious communities concerning freedom of
           religion.
           21.    Trial without undue delay is generally respected and is no longer a systemic issue
           in Slovenia.9 In 2015, the Judicial Council and the State Prosecutors’ Council adopted their
           respective codes of ethics and established ethics and integrity commissions. 10
           22.  Measures to ensure respect for, and the exercise of, political and civil rights of
           members of certain groups are presented in sections II.F–II.K.


      E.   Economic, social and cultural rights

           Recommendations 24, 25, 29, 30, 57, 67, 72, 75, 79, 81, 101, 135–143, 149
           23.    Slovenia endeavours to ensure respect for, and the exercise of, all economic, social
           and cultural rights nationwide.
           24.     Since the last UPR cycle in 2014, Slovenia has adopted several measures to reduce
           the level of poverty and social exclusion,11 and has abolished the austerity measures
           adopted during the economic crisis. Slovenia also adopted measures to ensure greater social
           inclusion of the most vulnerable groups. Since 2014, Slovenia has recorded an annual
           decrease in the risk of poverty and social exclusion. The statistical data for 2017 show that
           the at-risk-of-poverty rate was at 13.3%.12
           25.    In 2018, Slovenia increased the basic amount of the minimum wage and the
           number of people eligible for the two social transfers. The 2018 Act amending the
           Minimum Wage Act stipulates a gradual increase in the minimum wage as of 1 January
           2019. Slovenia expects that this measure will have a positive effect on the reduction of
           poverty and raise the disposable income.




4
                                                                                      A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


26.    Since 2014, Slovenia has implemented the Youth Guarantee Scheme, which
includes measures facilitating the labour market integration of young people. Youth
unemployment in Slovenia has been gradually decreasing since April 2015.
27.      Slovenia also strives to improve the situation of older persons, since a high poverty
rate is recorded in particular among the elderly living alone. Since 2016, pension indexation
has no longer been subject to austerity measures. In 2018, Slovenian pensions were indexed
twice, i.e. first regularly in January pursuant to the systemic law and then additionally in
April. The systemic law also defines the minimum pension at full retirement age. It is
planned that in 2019, the regular pension indexation in February, which resulted in a 2.7%
increase in pensions, will be followed by an additional indexation based on the economic
growth in 2018. Furthermore, in 2017 and 2018, all retired persons received the annual
bonus. In 2019, retired persons will receive the annual bonus in five different amounts,
which will be higher than the previous years.
28.    As of February 2017, the Act Amending the Social Assistance Benefits Act
abolished notices in the land register and the obligation of returning the guaranteed income
pension supplement or financial social assistance for cases where the recipient or his/her
family member owns an apartment or a house worth up to EUR 120,000. This amendment
increased the number of persons eligible for the guaranteed income pension supplement by
more than 6,000. The highest increases in the number of eligible persons have been
recorded in older age groups, i.e. the age group 66–79 (a 60% increase) and the oldest age
group – above 79 (a 77% increase).
29.    Slovenia continues to improve access to health care for the entire population. In
2018, Slovenia adopted the Resolution on the National Mental Health Programme
2018−2028, dedicating special attention to the issue of suicide.13 Slovenia is also planning
to amend the Mental Health Act. On 19 February 2019, after years of work to this end, a
secure ward for intensive psychiatric treatment of children and youth was opened within the
Ljubljana University Psychiatric Clinic to meet the national needs.
30.     In the period after the second UPR cycle, Slovenia has strengthened its legal
protection against eviction and the loss of housing.14 In accordance with the 2018 Act
Amending the Claim Enforcement and Security Act, in the case of enforcement of low-
amount claims on real estate in which the debtor lives, the court notifies the competent
social work centre which then provides social security services to address social distress
and difficulties. In addition, in these cases the court examines ex officio whether the debtor
owns other property on which the enforcement could be imposed, thus ensuring more
proportional measure to the value of the debt. Pursuant to the amendments, the court may
decide ex officio or at the proposal of the social work centre to further stay the enforcement
if an immediate enforcement would seriously jeopardize debtor’s housing situation.
31.    Housing tenancy is regulated under the Housing Act, which stipulates the at-fault
grounds for terminating a housing tenancy agreement. A tenancy agreement may not be
terminated by filing a lawsuit if the landlord has not first notified the tenant in writing that
he or she is violating the tenancy agreement.
32.     Everyone in Slovenia is entitled access to drinking water under equal
conditions.15 The constitutional act enshrining the right to drinking water in the
Constitution entered into force on 25 November 2016. An inter-ministerial working group,
composed of representatives of the competent ministries and government offices, was
established to harmonise Slovenian legislation with the right to drinking water as
stipulated in the Constitution. No later than by 31 December 2019, the working group
will examine the grounds for amendments to the legislation regulating matters referred to in
the new article 70a of the Constitution, prepare guidelines for draft amendments to
regulations, assist ministries in preparing the amendments and monitor their adoption.
33.    In the context of the right to education, Slovenia dedicates considerable attention to
human rights education and training. 16 Police officers, early childhood educators, primary
and secondary school teachers, university staff, and judicial officials participate in regular
training programmes to gain teaching competencies and to develop their expertise. The
human rights aspect has also been integrated into the traineeship programme, which



                                                                                                        5
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


           includes topics relating to the promotion of democracy among students and respect for
           diversity and multiculturalism.
           34.    Slovenia remains active in human rights education and training also at the
           international level, and continues to implement the Our Rights project. In the 2017–2019
           period, this project involved children from Morocco, Kosovo, Egypt, Palestine and
           Slovenia, and it was also presented in Australia.
           35.     Measures to ensure respect for, and the exercise of, economic, social and cultural
           rights of members of particular groups are presented in sections II.F–II.K.


      F.   The national communities and the Roma community

           Recommendations 25, 62, 63, 69, 72–74, 78–91, 102, 139, 150–155, 158–160, 162
           36.     Slovenia continues to improve the situation of Roma in the country. 17 The National
           Programme of Measures for Roma for the Period 2017–2021, adopted in May 2017,
           includes comprehensive measures to prevent discrimination against Roma and to improve
           their situation and social integration. The two key objectives of the Programme are to
           improve the situation of Roma community members and to promote their social integration.
           The Programme includes eight strategic objectives: (1) to improve the educational structure
           of Roma community members; (2) to reduce Roma unemployment rates; (3) to prevent or
           to eliminate the exclusion of Roma; (4) to improve healthcare services for Roma; (5) to
           improve their housing conditions; (6) to promote the maintenance and development of the
           cultural, informational and publishing activities of the Roma community; (7) to raise
           awareness among Roma community members and the majority population of the positive
           effects of social inclusion of Roma in society; (8) and to strengthen dialogue and
           cooperation with the local communities in which Roma live.
           37.    The implementation of the Programme is monitored by the Government
           Commission for the Protection of the Roma Community. The Government regularly reports
           to the National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia about the implementation of the
           Roma Community in the Republic of Slovenia Act and the Programme. The Government
           adopted the latest report, i.e. the Fifth Report on the Situation of the Roma Community in
           Slovenia on 18 July 2018. The Report was examined by the competent working body of the
           National Assembly on 27 September 2018, and discussed at the National Assembly plenary
           session on 28 November 2018.
           38.    The National Programme of Measures for Roma for the Period 2017–2021 includes
           measures to raise awareness of, and to fight against, discrimination, i.e. measures to
           strengthen and empower the Roma community and measures to break prejudice and
           stereotypes about Roma among the majority population. Special attention is dedicated to
           training and education programmes for public employees who in their professional capacity
           deal with members of the Roma community.18
           39.    With a view to strengthen the active engagement of Roma community
           organisations and their cooperation in the implementation of measures in the National
           Programme of Measures for Roma for the Period 2017–2021, the Office for National
           Minorities financially supports the Roma Community Council of the Republic of Slovenia,
           which was established under the Roma Community in the Republic of Slovenia Act to
           represent the interests of the Roma community at the level of national authorities. The
           Office also provides funding for the activities of other Roma community organisations
           through public calls for applications. 19
           40.    In May 2017, the Government established the Inter-ministerial Working Group for
           the Preparation of Amendments to the Roma Community in the Republic of Slovenia
           Act with a task to draft amendments, which were then harmonised with the Roma
           community. The amendments were discussed and supported by the Roma Community
           Council and the Government Commission for the Protection of the Roma Community. In
           March 2018, the amendments were adopted by the Government and submitted for
           consideration to the National Assembly. In the legislative term 2014–2018, the National



6
                                                                                     A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


Assembly did not discuss the amendments. New amendments to the Roma Community in
the Republic of Slovenia Act will be prepared again.
41.     Roma are a priority group for active employment policy measures, which include
workshops aimed at competence-building and improving employment opportunities. A
project of seven multi-purpose Roma centres is under way to offer activities for improving
the socio-economic situation of Roma community members (knowledge acquisition and
competence-building to enable them to be successful in the labour market), increasing their
quality of life, promoting and enhancing their integration into the broader community, and
establishing trust and cooperation with the majority population.
42.     In June 2018, a new spatial planning and construction legislation entered into force,
this consisting of three acts aimed at improving spatial planning and comprehensive siting
of buildings and facilitating the legalisation of buildings constructed without the necessary
permits. The solutions provided in the legislation primarily concern two categories of
buildings: those existing for a long period (20 years or more) and some illegal buildings
where special circumstances (including social) need to be taken into account. This approach
will also be used for legalisation of buildings in settlements where vulnerable social groups
such as Roma live.
43.    The introduction of Roma assistants has greatly facilitated the integration of Roma
children into the educational system. 20 At present, 28 Roma assistants are available in 33
preschools and primary and secondary schools.
44.    With regard to the Italian and Hungarian national communities, the Government
adopted the 2015, 2016 and 2017 reports on the implementation of the Programme of
Measures for the Implementation of Regulations on Bilingualism for the 2015–2018 Period;
these were discussed by the National Assembly Commission for National Communities.
The national communities have observed progress with the implementation of the
measures.
45.    In September 2018, the Act Amending the Act Regulating Special Rights of
Members of the Italian and Hungarian Ethnic Communities in the Field of Education
entered into force: this (1) broadens the right to use national community languages, i.e. to
short-cycle higher education and the education of children, minors and younger adults with
special needs; (2) broadens the right to free learning of the mother tongue for members of
the two national communities; (3) provides for bilingual questions for the pupils and
students of bilingual schools at knowledge competitions (except at Slovene and Hungarian
language competitions) which receive public funding; (4) amends decision-making by the
councils of bilingual educational institutions; (5) stipulates that the self-governing national
communities must submit their opinion on the proposals of annual work plans of
educational institutions and may also propose above-standard programmes; and (6) amends
conditions concerning the knowledge of the learning language and passing of the certified
examination.
46.    On the basis of the Action Plan for Language Education 2014-2018, the Action Plan
on Language Reference Tools 2014-2018 and the Resolution on the National Programme
for Language Policy for the 2014–2018 Period, the Inter-Ministerial Working Group for
Monitoring the Implementation of the Language Policy prepares annual reports on the
implementation of the Resolution and the action plans, past activities, co-financed projects,
programmes, studies, etc. These include activities promoting the use of the Italian and
Hungarian languages in the public sector in education, culture, the media (radio and TV
programmes), public information activities (e.g. the website Jezikovna Slovenija),
healthcare, and other public services (formal procedures and form sheets). In this light,
Slovenia strives to promote co-existence and cultural exchange, to improve the language
competence of all speakers, and to raise awareness of the importance of the use of the
Italian and Hungarian languages in the entire Slovenian territory, including outside
bilingual areas.21




                                                                                                       7
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


      G.   Foreigners

           Recommendations 55, 74
           47.     In accordance with the Foreigners Act, third-country nationals are entitled to
           participate in programmes facilitating their inclusion in cultural, economic and social life in
           Slovenia. The manner and scope of programmes are determined in the Decree on the means
           and scope of providing programmes of support for integrating third-country nationals.
           48.    The State provides funds for both Slovene language courses and mother tongue
           courses for immigrant students within regular primary and secondary education.
           49.    The latest amended acts governing secondary education (the Vocational Education
           Act and the Grammar School Act), which entered into force in 2017, provide for the
           possibility of learning Slovene for students whose mother tongue is not Slovene or who
           completed primary education in countries other than Slovenia. Schools enrolling immigrant
           students in the first and second years of education are granted a certain number of
           additional hours of professional help for students learning Slovene.
           50.    Between 2016 and 2018, a special manual for health professionals was compiled
           in order to facilitate communication between migrants and medical personnel in primary
           health care. In 2017 and 2018, inter-cultural dialogue projects were launched in three
           Slovenian towns with the aim of activating local communities in order to facilitate the
           integration of third-country nationals into local communities. The project is to conclude at
           the end of 2019. In the framework of the programme entitled “Initial Integration of
           Immigrants”, free-of-charge courses are available throughout Slovenia; these combine
           Slovene language acquisition with learning about Slovenian history, culture and
           constitutional arrangements.


      H.   Erased persons

           Recommendations 66, 95–97, 99, 100, 149, 161
           51.     To regulate the status of persons erased from the Register of Permanent Residents
           (the so-called “erased”), Slovenia adopted a series of measures. 22 In 2010, it adopted the
           Act Amending the Act Regulating the Legal Status of Citizens of Former Yugoslavia
           Living in the Republic of Slovenia. In 2013, to regulate the right to compensation of the
           “erased”, Slovenia adopted the Act Regulating the Compensation for Damage Sustained as
           a Result of Erasure from the Register of Permanent Residents (hereinafter: Compensation
           Act), which provides for the right to financial compensation and to other forms of just
           satisfaction as redress for the damage sustained. Other forms of just satisfaction ensure or
           facilitate the exercise of rights in various areas, such as payment of contributions for
           compulsory health insurance; inclusion and priority consideration in social protection
           programmes; facilitation of exercising the rights from public funds; state scholarships;
           equality of treatment with Slovenian citizens in resolving housing problems; access to the
           education system; and priority treatment in the so-called integration programmes.
           52.     The purpose of the Compensation Act is to ensure that eligible claimants obtain just
           satisfaction in an expedited and efficient way. The Compensation Act stipulates that
           eligible claimants may request financial compensation in an administrative procedure and
           also provides for other forms of just satisfaction. Claimants deeming that they have
           sustained greater damage may seek financial compensation in judicial proceedings. It is up
           to each claimant to decide whether they will exercise their right to financial compensation
           in administrative or judicial proceedings.
           53.    In 2018, the Constitutional Court23 ruled as unconstitutional Article 12 of the
           Compensation Act, which limited the amount of financial compensation that could be
           awarded to a claimant in judicial proceedings. To implement the Constitutional Court
           decision, the Act Amending the Act Regulating the Compensation for Damage Sustained as
           a Result of Erasure from the Register of Permanent Residents (hereinafter: Amending Act)
           was adopted; it entered into force on 30 December 2018. The Amending Act abolishes the



8
                                                                                          A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


     limitation of the financial compensation in judicial proceedings and provides for interest on
     arrears to be awarded to claimants in judicial proceedings.
     54.     The amended regulation applies to injured parties who filed their compensation
     claims after the date of application of the Compensation Act (after 18 June 2014) or prior to
     the date of application of the Compensation Act (before 18 June 2014) whose claims would
     be subject to the statute of limitation according to the previous arrangement. With regard to
     injured parties who had filed compensation claims prior to the date of application of the
     Compensation Act and whose claims, when filed, were not subject to the statute of
     limitations, the Constitutional Court Decision of 15 March 2018 repealed Article 12 of the
     Compensation Act with immediate effect. The Constitutional Court ruled that limiting the
     amount of financial compensation in judicial proceedings was unconstitutional and that
     claimants were entitled to full compensation regarding damage to property and to just
     financial compensation for non-property damage sustained.


I.   Persons with disabilities

     Recommendations 145–148
     55.    Slovenia remains committed to respect and implement the human rights of persons
     with disabilities.24 A major step forward was the adoption of the Personal Assistance Act,
     enabling the employment of personal assistants. An act that will provide for an institution
     for protecting the rights of persons with disabilities is in the process of harmonisation.
     56.    As part of the cohesion policy for the 2018–2022 period, a call for proposals has
     been issued inviting NGOs to participate in the project related to equal opportunities for
     and non-discrimination of persons with disabilities. In order to make legislation related
     to people with disabilities more easily accessible, it is being translated into easily readable
     forms. The project also involves training courses delivered by experts specialising in
     accessibility of the built environment and information and communications technology
     (ICT).
     57.     Slovenia has in place an active policy of employing persons with disabilities, and
     invites projects that provide employers with access to training for employing persons with
     disabilities. The project entitled “Transition of Youth” is under way; the project – through a
     comprehensive approach and systematically designed content – aims to promote social
     inclusion of young people with special needs and thus help create a unified support
     environment to facilitate the transition from school to the labour market.
     58.   Slovenia continues its efforts to further improve accessibility of the built
     environment and infrastructure. In the framework of development social assistance
     programmes, Slovenia co-funds the development programme entitled “Transport of
     Students with Disabilities”.
     59.    A new Building Act has been adopted, stipulating mandatory compliance with
     regulations governing the universal design of all buildings in public use. The Act provides
     the basis for the Rules on the universal design and usability of the built environment, which
     provides accessibility and usability of the built environment and consider other standards
     (SIST ISO 21542:2012).
     60.     2017 saw the entry into force of the amended National Assembly Elections Act,
     stipulating that polling stations must be accessible to people with disabilities. The
     amended act was applied during the elections to the National Assembly and local elections
     in 2018 and during the European elections in 2019.
     61.     Special measures are in place to address discrimination against children with
     special needs. Slovenia encourages NGOs to employ people willing to cooperate with
     educational institutions in working with children with special needs. Educational
     institutions continue to employ assistants to work with children with special needs. Other
     related activities include projects promoting social integration of children and youth with
     special needs into local environments, building a network of specialised institutions to




                                                                                                            9
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


           support children with special needs and their families, and a comprehensive programme for
           institutionalised children with emotional and behavioural disorders.


      J.   Gender equality

           Recommendations 21, 23, 25, 59–61, 104–108, 110, 111
           62.    Slovenia is committed to women’s empowerment and gender equality both at the
           national and international levels. Slovenia’s national policy priorities are set in the
           Resolution on the National Programme for Equal Opportunities for Women and Men
           2015-2020.25 Measures for the protection of women’s rights are more specifically
           determined in periodic plans. In 2018, the Government adopted the Report on the
           Implementation of the Resolution on the National Programme for Equal Opportunities for
           Women and Men 2015-2020 for 2016 and 2017 and the Periodic Plan for 2018 and 2019.
           63.    Through regular annual calls for proposals, Slovenia co-funds projects of NGOs
           related to equality between women and men, with the main focus on awareness raising,
           prevention of gender-based discrimination and elimination of gender stereotypes,
           whereby special attention is devoted to vulnerable groups. In 2019, public calls are being
           issued for the implementation of social security programmes covering the active integration
           of Roma women and other vulnerable groups of women with the aim of strengthening their
           integration in the local environment and their prospects on the labour market in order to
           reduce the risk of poverty. Since 2017, to prevent gender-based discrimination, gender
           perspective has been included in newly published school textbooks. Where necessary,
           updates of primary- and secondary-school curricula include changes with regard to gender
           equality.
           64.    Slovenia promotes a balanced representation of both genders in leadership
           positions by carrying out regular activities focused on awareness-raising, provision of
           information and competence-building. Special attention is devoted to leadership positions
           in politics (particularly at the local level) and in business. Following the 2018 elections,
           women’s representation in the National Assembly dropped slightly, as only 24.4% of the
           elected deputies were female. The 2018 local elections saw an increase in female mayors
           (up to 10%) and female municipal councillors (up to 33%). Amendments to the Equal
           Opportunities for Women and Men Act are in preparation; these will legally introduce the
           principle of a minimum 40% representation of both genders in certain government bodies,
           self-governing local communities, and public law entities whose representatives are
           appointed by the Government or self-governing local communities.
           65.    In Slovenia, the gender gap in average pay is among the lowest in Europe. It has
           been observed that the elements contributing to lower wages and pensions of women
           include different behavioural patterns throughout life. In 2019, the Ministry of Labour,
           Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities launched the project “My work, my
           pension”, co-funded by the European Union. The purpose of the project is to develop
           awareness-raising tools in order to enable women and men to take better-informed
           decisions concerning their employment and vocation throughout their lives.
           66.    Efforts for preventing violence against women continue.26 A resolution on a
           national plan for the prevention of family violence and violence against women is in
           preparation. The resolution will include guidelines for working with sexually abused
           children. In 2019, Slovenia is preparing the first report on the implementation of the
           Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and
           Domestic Violence.
           67.     In 2017, as part of the efforts to prevent all forms of violence against women and
           girls, Slovenia launched the project “Click-off! Stop cyber violence against women and
           girls”, which is co-funded by the European Commission. The project will end in December
           2019. It focuses mainly on women and girls aged between 12 and 30, and its aim is to
           prevent and eliminate gender stereotypes and increase sensitivity and awareness. Part of the
           project is a targeted media campaign to reach potential victims of cyber violence and
           harassment, particularly girls and boys aged 12 to 19 and their parents. By raising public


10
                                                                                          A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


     awareness of cyber violence against and harassment of women and girls, the campaign
     enhances sensitivity towards gender stereotypes and sexism and promotes a different
     attitude towards preventing cyber violence.


K.   Children

     Recommendations 20, 21, 23, 25, 39, 40, 42, 68, 91, 93, 104, 105, 109–118, 130, 131
     68.    The legislative framework for the protection of the rights of the child is ensured by
     the Family Code, adopted in 2017, which provides for the highest level of protective
     measures.27 Between 2006 and 2016, concrete measures for the protection and
     development of children and youth were specified in the Programme for Children and
     Youth (2006–2016). A new programme for children for the 2019–2024 period is in
     preparation; this will put special emphasis on preventing violence against and protection of
     children, their participation in procedures that concern them, security in digital
     environment, children-friendly justice, and equal opportunities for all children. The
     document will be based on the recommendations contained in the Council of Europe
     Strategy for the Rights of the Child 2016–2021 and will take into account the needs and
     quality of the lives of children in Slovenia. A separate programme document was adopted
     for youth, i.e. the Resolution on the National Programme for Youth for 2013–2022. The
     amended Family Violence Prevention Act adopted in 2016 enacted the explicit prohibition
     of corporal punishment and degrading treatment of children. 28
     69.    In the 2018–2020 period, Slovenia is co-funding 11 family centres which provide
     training and practical workshops on positive parenting aimed at strengthening parenting
     competences as one of mandatory courses. The purpose of the training is to foster positive
     changes in family upbringing patterns.
     70.    Slovenia also co-funds 15 psychosocial assistance programmes for children, youth
     and families aiming to teach effective communication, improve relations and positive
     attachment in the family, improve the social competences of children and youth, improve
     emotion management, help build a positive self-image, boost preventive problem-solving,
     including behavioural and emotional problems, provide homework and study help, reduce
     emotional distress, etc.
     71.     In addition, Slovenia funds 15 multi-generational centres equally distributed over the
     territory of Slovenia, which implement five-year preventive programmes focusing on the
     social inclusion of vulnerable social groups and prevention of social exclusion. The centres
     also provide training and workshops for the development of parenting competences.
     72.    In order to protect children from violence, the Organisation and Financing of
     Education Act was amended to more clearly define safe and stimulating learning
     environment where corporal punishment of children as well as any other form of violence
     against and among children and unequal treatment based on their personal circumstances
     are prohibited.
     73.     Activities are also under way to prevent peer violence29 among young people and
     violence against teachers. In 2017, regional consultations on violence were organised, and
     violence against teachers was included in the Teaching and Learning International Survey
     (TALIS). In September 2018, the Police and the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport
     launched a two-year project entitled “Peer Violence: Reducing Violence among Youth” to
     help reduce peer violence and violence against teachers. Another important objective of the
     project is to support Slovenian institutions in the implementation of the national strategic
     plan for the prevention of violence against children, violence among minors and violence
     against teachers in the education process, in the family and in society at large. The
     legislation on secondary-school education was revised in the second half of 2017, extending
     the list of the gravest violations that might provide grounds for expulsion of secondary-
     school students to include endangering their or other people’s life or health that could result
     in serious bodily or mental harm.
     74.   As regards safe use of modern information and communication technologies,
     Slovenia adopted strategic orientations in 2016, striving to ensure education in a safe, open,


                                                                                                           11
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


           creative and sustainable learning environment supported by innovative uses of ICT. This
           will enable effective and quality acquisition of knowledge and skills needed for successful
           integration into society as well as contributing to improved skills and competences of pupils
           and students. In 2017, the European Digital Competence Framework for Citizens issued by
           the European Commission was translated into Slovene.
           75.    Since 2009, digital literacy has been part of the primary- and secondary-school
           curricula. Teachers, principals and other teaching professionals in educational institutions
           are provided with regular training in digital competences. Since 2016, groundwork has been
           in preparation to include IT basics into pre-school curricula and more advanced IT topics in
           primary- and secondary-school curricula. The content includes safe Internet use and
           preserving health with the help of ICT.
           76.   The primary goal of safe mobility in educational institutions is the acquisition of
           knowledge and skills needed for safe mobility through a combination of activities ranging
           from health promotion and exercise to ecological and environmental perspectives and social
           elements, all together resulting in sustainable mobility.
           77.    A survey conducted by the Social Protection Institute of the Republic of Slovenia
           has demonstrated that child labour or forced child labour is not a systemic issue in
           Slovenia. Furthermore, forced labour for survival is practically non-existent, and is
           noticeable only in the form of excessive care for siblings and domestic overwork,
           particularly in rural settings, which is most frequently identified by school staff.
           78.     Criminal legislation in force already contains special provisions for juveniles which
           are in accordance with international standards. The purpose of a special act on criminal
           liability of juvenile offenders is to ensure a comprehensive legal basis for dealing with
           juvenile offenders in criminal proceedings. A special juvenile criminal code is in
           preparation; The Government is planning to submit the draft act to the National Assembly
           in 2019. The act will regulate content on juvenile offenders presently regulated by the
           Criminal Code, the Criminal Procedure Act and the Enforcement of Criminal Sanctions
           Act. In addition, the act will transpose Directive (EU) 2016/800 on procedural safeguards
           for children who are suspects or accused persons in criminal proceedings. The act will be
           based on generally established and internationally recognised principles for juvenile
           offenders: the principle of non-discrimination; the best interests of the child; the right to
           life, survival and development; the right to be heard; and respecting dignity. In its basic
           provisions, the draft act explicitly acknowledges that the principle of the best interests of
           the child and juvenile (depending on the age definition of offenders in the draft act) must be
           observed, that proportionality must be applied in all proceedings involving juveniles and
           that deterring procedures take precedence over criminal prosecution.


      L.   Trafficking in human beings

           Recommendations 119–127
           79.    In 2018, Slovenia strengthened its institutional structure for combating trafficking
           in human beings.30 On 26 November 2018, the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of
           Slovenia established a department for preventing and combating trafficking in human
           beings, which also includes the National Coordinator for combating trafficking in human
           beings.
           80.    In December 2015, the Government adopted a decision on the extension of the
           Working Group on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings to include representatives of
           the Financial Administration, the Office for National Minorities and the Association of Free
           Trade Unions of Slovenia. In 2017, the Working Group was further extended with
           representatives of the Government Office for Support and Integration of Migrants.
           81.   Furthermore, in accordance with the adopted action plans, line ministries and
           governmental services are allocating more funds to the activities aimed at preventing and
           combating trafficking in human beings.




12
                                                                                     A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


82.    Slovenia has also intensified its efforts in dealing with the issue of early and forced
marriages in the Roma community. Since 2015, forcing someone into marriage or a similar
union has been treated as a criminal offence. The 2017–2021 National Programme of
Measures for Roma imposes an obligation to prepare a protocol to be followed when
dealing with cases of non-marital cohabitation involving minors or elopement of minors
into harmful environments (early marriages). The task to prepare a protocol and address the
issue of forced marriages in the Roma community was entrusted to an ad hoc inter-
ministerial working group. In November 2018, the Office for National Minorities organised
national consultations on early and forced marriages, and in April 2019, two sets of
regional consultations were held, one on forced and one on early marriages. The
conclusions reached at the three events will serve as a basis for drafting a manual outlining
in more detail the two phenomena and presenting guidelines for action to be taken by the
competent institutions. In 2018, on the basis of arrangements with the Judicial Training
Centre, five lectures for judges and judicial professionals were given on this topic. The
lectures are continuing in 2019. The 2017–2018 Action Plan for Combating Trafficking in
Human Beings provided the basis for preventive awareness-raising activities targeting
potential human trafficking victims in Roma communities. The 2018 public call for
proposals for co-funding ICT and education projects of NGOs and humanitarian
organisations also included contents related to raising the awareness of dangers inherent in
forced and arranged marriages; some of those projects were implemented in Roma
communities.
83.    For the 2019–2020 period, the necessary funds have been allocated for the
implementation of the project “(Re)integration of Human Trafficking Victims”. 31 The
project is intended both for Slovenian nationals who have been identified as victims of
human trafficking abroad and for EU and third-country citizens legally residing in Slovenia
who have been identified as human trafficking victims in pre-trial investigation or criminal
proceedings in Slovenia.
84.     Assistance to minor victims of trafficking in human beings is currently provided
under crisis and safe accommodation programmes intended for victims of human
trafficking, which impose the obligation to assist and protect child victims of human
trafficking. In accordance with the Action Plan for the 2019–2020 Period, the
Interdepartmental Working Group on the Fight against Trafficking in Human Beings is
seeking solutions for ensuring comprehensive and sustainable assistance to children with
experience in human trafficking, including the provision of appropriate accommodation.
85.     Regular education and training on trafficking in human beings is provided for police
officers, judges and consular staff. 32 In 2017 and 2018, the Police carried out basic training
courses for border police candidates aimed at raising the awareness and identifying red-flag
indicators of human trafficking. The Police provide continuous training for criminal
investigators and police officers at the local level, focusing on recognising various forms of
human trafficking, identifying potential victims and perpetrators, and learning about further
procedures in dealing with victims and conducting pre-trial investigations. In 2017 and
2018, training courses were provided for criminal investigators from regional criminal
police directorates who investigate human trafficking related criminal offences with a
special focus on the identification of and conducting procedures involving human
trafficking victims.
86.    In 2018, three training courses were organised for judges and investigating judges,
two in the framework of the Criminal Law School for Judges (“Trafficking in human
beings: Identifying the phenomenon in modern society”), and one at the seminar for
investigating judges (“Forms of trafficking in human beings”).
87.     Awareness-raising and training for consular staff on various forms of human
trafficking continues in the framework of regular annual consultations, regional
consultations and preparations for performing consular duties in diplomatic missions and
consular posts. This topic is also part of the training of diplomats for consular duties prior
to posting abroad.
88.     Slovenia continues its efforts to strengthen international cooperation in combating
trafficking in human beings. 33 Special attention is devoted to the regions of South-Eastern


                                                                                                      13
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


           Europe and the Western Balkans in particular. In March 2018, Slovenia held an informal
           meeting of ministers of the interior of the Brdo-Brijuni Process. The meeting aimed at
           enhancing cooperation in combating trafficking in human beings was also attended by
           representatives of the informal network of national anti-trafficking coordinators from
           South-Eastern Europe established on Slovenia’s initiative. The ministers reaffirmed
           continued support for the successful work of the informal network in combating trafficking
           in human beings. Together with national coordinators, the ministers adopted a joint
           declaration on strengthening regional cooperation in combating trafficking in human beings
           in South-Eastern Europe.
           89.     In June 2018, a twinning project targeting fight against organised crime in Serbia
           was successfully concluded; within the project, the component which Slovenia focused on
           was combating trafficking in human beings. Since September 2018, Slovenia has
           participated in another two-year twinning project in Serbia entitled “Support for
           strengthening the fight against trafficking in human beings”.


     III. Challenges in the field of human rights since the last review

      A.   Migration

           90.     In all activities related to refugees and migrants, Slovenia underlines the respect for
           human rights and their universality. Slovenia signed the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
           and Regular Migration and the Global Compact on Refugees, and is committed to
           observing both in its national policies. The two compacts represent an important milestone
           in designing, developing and strengthening policies related to international migration and
           safeguarding persons in need of international protection. The Government has established
           excellent cooperation with governmental and non-governmental organisations operating in
           the field of migration. During the period of a marked increase in arrivals of migrants and
           applicants for international protection in 2015 and 2016, Slovenia devoted special attention
           to providing those persons with the necessary care and protection. Upon admittance to
           reception centres, they were given brochures providing information on how to apply for
           international protection in a language they understood. Health care was provided for all,
           while members of vulnerable groups (children, women, the elderly and the disabled) were
           accorded special attention and priority treatment. Separate accommodation was provided
           for women, and nursing corners established.
           91.    Slovenia’s humanitarian aid funds are allocated in order to improve the situation of
           refugees and address the root causes of migration. Additional activities in Slovenia related
           to refugees include bilateral projects dealing with mine-awareness education, psychosocial
           and economic empowerment, and ensuring better food and water security in refugee camps.
           92.    The establishment of the Government Office for the Support and Integration of
           Migrants was a major step forward towards more effective action related to migration. The
           Office has been operational since 1 June 2017 and is responsible for providing basic
           support to applicants for international protection and for ensuring the rights of and
           implementing the integration measures concerning persons who have been granted
           international protection.
           93.    In November 2018, the Government set up an inter-ministerial working group to
           draft and monitor the implementation of a government strategy on migration and to
           coordinate migration-related activities. Other tasks of the inter-ministerial working group
           include coordination in the field of migration and coordination of operative activities in
           circumstances of increased migration. The strategy will define the goals, orientations and
           measures for effective migration management in the Republic of Slovenia.
           94.    In July 2018, to adapt to the current situation and needs related to international
           protection, the Government adopted an updated Contingency Plan to provide housing and
           care in the event of an increase in the number of applicants for international protection and
           to implement international protection procedures.



14
                                                                                        A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


 B.   Hate speech

      95.   Slovenia, as many other contemporary societies, has recently seen an increase in
      freedom of speech violations in the form of hate speech.
      96.    The Police have been actively involved in the identification, prevention and
      prosecution of various manifestations of hate speech. For this purpose, additional training
      has been provided for police officers working in multicultural communities. Significant
      emphasis is put on awareness-raising and integrating the activities of national and local
      authorities in multicultural environments.
      97.     Competent state bodies will examine the need for possible additional awareness-
      raising measures related to hate speech and analyse the appropriateness of the regulatory
      framework on hate speech in the broadest sense. Competent state bodies, assisted by
      experts on hate speech, are already studying the possibility of introducing new media
      legislation to facilitate the detection of, prompt response to and deletion of contents
      containing hate speech and provide for possible sanctions.


IV. Achievements in the sphere of human rights

 A.   Integration of migrant children into the education system

      98.    Over the past few years, Slovenia has had to deal with an increasing number of
      migrants and applicants for international protection, including children who require special
      protection. Important issues in this regard are education and inclusion in education.
      99.    From the 2018/2019 academic year onwards, the Decree on the methods and
      conditions for ensuring rights of persons with international protection has provided for
      people who cannot demonstrate their formal education to sit for examinations in
      mathematics and English at the National Examination Centre: if they pass the examinations,
      they can enrol in study programmes at higher-education institutions. The 2018/2019
      academic year saw improved conditions for successful integration of secondary-school
      students whose mother tongue is not Slovene or who completed primary education in
      countries other than Slovenia. Students attend an intensive Slovene course in the first year
      of secondary education in Slovenia.
      100. The study entitled “Evaluation of Slovene Learning Models (2018-2019)” is under
      way, and curricula are being prepared for beginners’ Slovene courses at the pre-school and
      primary-school levels.
      101. In 2017, considerable attention was devoted to education and training in intercultural
      competences for teaching professionals, and a special website was launched for school
      managements, teachers, parents and the interested public. A public call for proposals has
      been issued entitled “Strengthening social and civic competences of teaching professionals
      (2016–2021)” aimed at empowering teaching professionals to be better able to facilitate the
      integration of immigrant children, pupils and students into society.
      102. In 2016, in order to provide adequate accommodation for unaccompanied minors as
      a vulnerable group requiring all-day care and professional assistance, the Government, in
      the framework of a pilot project, ensured safe accommodation on the premises of student
      dormitories in Postojna and Nova Gorica. After the evaluation, the project was recognised
      as an example of good practice. A systemic arrangement for resolving the issue of
      accommodation of unaccompanied minors is foreseen for the end of 2019 to enable
      sustainable integration into society.
      103. A number of documents have been prepared, including the “Implementation
      instructions for the accommodation of unaccompanied minors in student dormitories”,
      “Forms and contents of expert work with unaccompanied minors in student dormitories”
      and “Protocol and procedures for the accommodation of unaccompanied minors in student
      dormitories”.



                                                                                                         15
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


      B.   Rights of older persons

           104. As a result of the demographic transition34 in the country, Slovenia pays particular
           attention to the situation and rights of older persons. Slovenia started to respond to the
           transition as early as 1997 by adopting the first strategy on the social security of the elderly.
           In 2017, the Government adopted a long-term Active Ageing Strategy setting the following
           strategic goals: (1) Wellbeing for all generations and safe living in the home environment,
           (2) Participation of all generations in intergenerational practice, and (3) Physical and mental
           health of people of all ages. The four pillars underpinning the Strategy are employment
           (Labour market and education), independent, healthy and safe living for all generations,
           inclusion in society, and creation of an environment conducive to active ageing. In
           February 2018, the Government established the Council for Active Ageing and
           Intergenerational Cooperation. Action plans for the implementation of the strategy are in
           preparation; these are foreseen to be approved by the Government in the autumn of 2019.
           105. A separate act on long-term care is in preparation to reinforce the right of older
           persons needing assistance in daily activities to a decent life, care and safety. The aim of
           systemic regulation of long-term care is to ensure people entitled to long-term care to enjoy
           comparable rights for comparable needs. Slovenia believes that the planned solutions will
           make a significant contribution to the overall care for the elderly, both in old people’s
           homes and in community care.
           106. To address discrimination on the basis of age, NGOs have been invited to engage in
           awareness-raising activities. A number of projects are under way in various parts of
           Slovenia.
           107. Slovenia advocates the protection of the rights of older persons also at the
           international level, and is a staunch supporter of a new international legal instrument
           regulating the rights of older persons.


      C.   Women, peace and security

           108. In November 2018, the Government adopted the 2nd Action Plan of the Republic of
           Slovenia for the Implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolutions on
           Women, Peace and Security in the 2018–2020 Period. The Action Plan was the result of
           inter-ministerial efforts, and the line ministries consulted with the civil society on its
           content. The document was prepared on the basis of the findings of the Implementation
           Review of the Action Plan of the Republic of Slovenia for the Implementation of United
           Nations Security Council Resolutions 1325 and 1820 on Women, Peace and Security in the
           2010–2015 Period, adopted by the Government in July 2017. The purpose of the Action
           Plan is to contribute to international activities aimed at achieving gender equality in the
           field of peace and security and related areas (humanitarian aid and development
           cooperation, human rights and the rule of law).


      D.   Business and human rights

           109. In November 2018, the Government adopted the National Action Plan on Business
           and Human Rights. The Action Plan was drafted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in
           cooperation with line ministries, the academic community, business representatives, trade
           unions and NGOs. By adopting the National Action Plan, Slovenia intends to strengthen the
           activities aimed at ensuring respect for human rights in business activities along the entire
           value chain and to further develop the cooperation between the state, businesses, NGOs and
           other stakeholders. Attached to the National Action Plan are the Guidelines on Corporate
           Human Rights Due Diligence, which are designed to assist businesses in the identification,
           prevention and mitigation of negative impacts of their operation and practices on human
           rights and in reporting on their findings. Slovenia is the 22nd state in the world to have
           adopted such a National Action Plan. On the State’s initiative, 10 businesses have
           committed to implement corporate human rights due diligence.



16
                                                                                         A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


E.   Implementation of judgments of the European Court of Human Rights

     110. A tangible measure of respect for human rights is also the implementation of
     international courts judgments. With regard to the implementation of judgments of the
     European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), Slovenia has made noticeable progress. By the
     end of 2015, 309 ECtHR judgments remained to be implemented; by the end of 2017, the
     number had dropped to 49, and at the end of 2018, only 11 final judgments remained to be
     implemented, owing to systemic measures at the governmental level and the introduction of
     an effective project structure at the Ministry of Justice.


V. Implementation of voluntary pledges and commitments

A.   Voluntary pledges and commitments for membership of the Human
     Rights Council in the 2016–2018 period

     111. As a candidate State for the UN Human Rights Council membership in 2016–2018,
     Slovenia committed to (1) strive for progress in the sphere of human rights in appropriate
     international human rights forums, (2) promote gender equality and protection of
     vulnerable groups, and (3) mainstream a human rights perspective in the development
     agenda, environmental protection, business and education.
     112. During its second membership of the UNHRC, Slovenia made every effort to
     implement the above-mentioned commitments. It advocated the mainstreaming of gender
     perspective in the work of the UNHRC. During its membership, Slovenia was among the
     proposers of three initiatives – on the environment and human rights, on the rights of
     members of minorities, and on human rights education.
     113. At the national level, Slovenia included a human rights perspective in its
     Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Aid Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia until
     2030. One of its cross-cutting issues is gender equality. Slovenia has adopted the Action
     Plan of the Republic of Slovenia for the Implementation of United Nations Security
     Council Resolutions on Women, Peace and Security in the 2018–2020 Period and the
     National Action Plan on Business and Human Rights. Slovenia continues to strive for
     human rights education and training at the national and international levels and for
     recognising the right to a clean, healthy and safe environment as a human right.
     114. In 2018, the former Slovenian Permanent Representative to the UN Office in
     Geneva held the office of President of the UN Human Rights Council; his priorities were
     primarily to (1) enhance the Council’s efficiency, (2) increase its reputation and visibility
     and strengthen cooperation with other UN entities, (3) strengthen cooperation with regional
     organisations (4) improve the constructive atmosphere, foster dialogue and instil trust in the
     Council’s work, (5) allow enough space for the participation of civil society in the
     Council’s work, and (6) promote transparent, impartial and inclusive functioning of the
     Council. The presidential statement adopted in 2018 is an important contribution to
     increasing the efficiency of the UN Human Rights Council.


B.   Voluntary pledges and commitments in the Universal Periodic Review

     115. During the second cycle of the Universal Periodic Review, Slovenia made a
     commitment to submit a voluntary Mid-term report on the implementation of the accepted
     recommendations. The Voluntary Mid-term Report was approved by the Government on 24
     May 2017. In June 2017, the Report was submitted to the Office of the UN High
     Commissioner for Human Rights and presented at the 35th session of the UN Human
     Rights Council.




                                                                                                          17
A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1


        VI. Conclusion
               116. Slovenia remains committed to the Universal Periodic Review, and will continue to
               strive for constructive action within this mechanism, with regard to both the Slovenian and
               other countries’ periodic reviews, in order to further strengthen the promotion of human
               rights.

Notes

           1  Slovenia has noted and implemented recommendation 26 by introducing children’s rights advocates.
           2  More information on the Protection against Discrimination Act is provided in the Voluntary UPR
              Mid-term Report (recommendations 22, 46, 47, 50, 51).
            3 The Advocate’s activities system-wide involve conducting independent research, monitoring

              discrimination at the national level, reporting to national authorities and other entities responsible for
              promoting equality and eliminating and preventing discrimination, and awareness-raising among
              stakeholders and the wider public of the importance of equality and non-discrimination. The
              Advocate may also request a constitutional review of discriminatory general legal acts. At the level of
              individuals, the Advocate conducts procedures to establish instances of discrimination in concrete
              cases and offers advice to victims of discrimination, who the Advocate may also represent or
              accompany in administrative and court proceedings concerning discrimination.
            4 More information on the Protection against Discrimination Act is provided in the Voluntary UPR

              Mid-term Report (recommendations 22, 46–50, 51, 57, 62, 63, 65).
            5 Further details on the legislation prohibiting hate speech and acts of hatred are provided in the

              Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (recommendation 45).
            6 Measures promoting cooperation to address hate speech and acts of hatred and various other forms of

              intolerance are presented in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (recommendations 48, 49).
            7 Further information on Slovenia’s international legal obligations is provided in the Voluntary UPR

              Mid-term Report (see response to recommendation 134).
            8 More information is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (recommendation 64).
            9 More information is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (recommendation 128).
           10 More information is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (recommendation 129).
           11 Information on measures in the period up to 2017 is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report

              (see recommendations 101, 135, 136 in 137).
           12 Slovenia’s at-risk-of-poverty rate is among the lowest in Europe. It is calculated using the Eurostat

              methodology. The at-risk-of-poverty rate is the percentage of the population living in households
              where the equivalised disposable income (after social transfers) is below the at-risk-of-poverty
              threshold, which is set at 60% of the national median equivalised disposable income.
           13 More information on Slovenia’s healthcare system and health insurance is provided in the Voluntary

              UPR Mid-term Report (see recommendation 142). For information on mental health and suicide
              prevention, see also recommendation 141.
           14 Information on Slovenia’s applicable legislation is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report

              (recommendation 138).
           15 Information on Slovenia’s legislation regulating access to drinking water and sanitation is provided in

              the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (see recommendation 140).
           16 Further information on human rights education activities is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term

              Report (recommendation 24).
           17 Detailed information on Slovenia’s efforts to improve the situation of Roma in the country is

              provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report (recommendations 62, 63, 69, 72, 73, 81, 84, 86, 91,
              139, 158, 159).
           18 Three training programmes were organised in 2018 for 68 public employees who in their professional

              capacity deal with members of the Roma community. Roma assistants, who work in educational
              institutions, attend regular pedagogical training programmes. Two additional assistants have been
              trained within the project ‘Together for knowledge – The development of a support mechanism of
              learning for Roma community members’, and nine more are being trained. In 2018, the Police
              organised seven training programmes entitled ‘Recognising stereotypes, overcoming prejudice and
              preventing discrimination in police work in a multicultural society’; these were attended by 142
              members of the Police. Furthermore, in 2018, as part of the measure ‘Police work in the community’,
              the Police conducted 300 preventive activities in the Roma community.
           19 These activities include workshops, conferences, consultations, awareness-raising, and educational

              and activation programmes. Roma community organisations (associations) may perform these
              activities alone or in tandem with other institutions and organisations. The purpose is to promote the
              social inclusion and empowerment of Roma, to improve their situation, and to eliminate intolerance



18
                                                                                                 A/HRC/WG.6/34/SVN/1



   among the majority and minority populations, particularly in local communities. The funding for the
   Roma umbrella organisation of Slovenia and other Roma organisations and associations also
   contributes to the capacity-building of the Roma civil society. The inclusion of Roma civil society in
   the preparation, implementation and monitoring of action plans and measures is provided for by law
   (the Roma Community in the Republic of Slovenia Act) and is implemented in practice when the
   competent ministries and local self-governing communities address issues relating to members of the
   Roma community. The Roma community also participated in the preparation of the National
   Programme of Measures for Roma for the Period 2017–2021, with its representatives involved in
   consultations with the competent ministries. When the Programme was open for public debate, both
   the Roma community and the broader civil society were invited to submit proposals.
20 The institute of the Roma assistant is presented in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report

   (recommendations 25 and 84).
21 In accordance with Regulation (EC) No 763/2008 on population and housing censuses, Slovenia has

   conducted register-based population censuses since 2011. Data on national affiliation are not included
   in the administrative databases. The Medium-Term Programme of Statistical Surveys 2018–2022
   does not foresee any survey to collect data on the national affiliation of individuals. Slovenia has thus
   noted and implemented recommendation 157.
22 More detailed information on the legislative measures aimed at redress and compensation for the

   damage sustained by erasure is provided in the Slovenia’s latest Voluntary Mid-term Report
   (recommendation 66).
23 Decision of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Slovenia No. U-I-80/16-36, U-I-166/16-28,

   U-I-173/16-33 of 15 March 2018 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia No. 24/18).
24 The Government continues the efforts outlined in the Voluntary Mid-term Report (Recommendations

   145–148).
25 More detailed information on the Resolution on the National Programme for Equal Opportunities for

   Women and Men is provided in the Voluntary Mid-term Report (recommendations 23, 59).
26 More detailed information on the measures in force was included in the Voluntary Mid-term Report

   (Recommendation 105).
27 The adoption of the Family Code, which was presented in more detail in the Mid-term Report

   (recommendations 20, 131), contributes to the implementation of recommendations 19 and 27, of
   which Slovenia took note.
28 More detailed information on the Family Violence Prevention Act is included in the Voluntary Mid-

   term Report (Recommendations 104 and 105). In our view, the adoption and implementation of the
   Act also implements Recommendation 41, of which Slovenia took note.
29 More information on the legal arrangement and certain past projects related to preventing violence in

   school environment is provided in the Voluntary Mid-term Report (Recommendation 113).
30 Further information on Slovenia’s past activities is provided in the Voluntary UPR Mid-term Report

   (Recommendation 125).
31 Measures to prevent trafficking in human beings and assist victims are outlined in the Voluntary Mid-

   term Report (Recommendations 120, 122–124).
32 Education and training activities were included in the Voluntary Mid-term Report (Recommendation

   119).
33 Slovenia’s past activities related to international cooperation are outlined in the Voluntary Mid-term

   Report (Recommendation 121).
34 Judging by the current trends, by 2030, over 25% of Slovenia’s population will be aged above 65.




                                                                                                                  19
